Mr. Speaker –

One of the greatest choices a person can make in their life is the choice to serve their fellow citizens. Maybe it’s in government, in the military, or in a police force. In whatever capacity one serves, dedicating your life to making Canada – and indeed, the world – a better place is a calling of the highest order.

Now imagine, if you will, being told that the very country you would willingly lay down your life to defend doesn’t want you. Doesn’t accept you. Sees you as defective. Sees you as a threat to our national security.

Not because you can’t do the job, or because you lack patriotism or courage – no, because of who you are as a person, and because of who your sexual partners are.

Now imagine, Mr. Speaker, being subjected to laws, policies, and hiring practices that label you as different – as “less than”.

Imagine having to fight for the basic rights that your peers enjoy, over and over again.

And imagine being criminalized for being who you are.

This is the truth for many of the Canadians present in the Gallery today, and those listening across the country.

This is the devastating story of people who were branded criminals by the government. People who lost their livelihoods, and in some cases, their lives.

These aren’t distant practices of Governments long forgotten. This happened systematically, in Canada, with a timeline more recent than any of us would like to admit.

Mr. Speaker, today we acknowledge an often-overlooked part of Canada’s history. Today, we finally talk about Canada’s role in the systemic oppression, criminalization, and violence against the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and two-spirit communities.

And it is my hope that in talking about these injustices, vowing to never repeat them, and acting to right these wrongs, we can begin to heal.

Since arriving on these shores, settlers to this land brought with them foreign standards of right and wrong – of acceptable and unacceptable behaviour. Suitable and unsuitable partnerships.

They brought rigid gender norms – norms that manifested in homophobia and transphobia. Norms that saw the near-destruction of Indigenous LGBTQ and two-spirit identities. People who were once revered for their identities found themselves shamed for who they were. They were rejected and left vulnerable to violence.

And discrimination against LGBTQ2 communities was quickly codified in criminal offences like “buggery”, “gross indecency”, and bawdy house provisions.

Bathhouses were raided, people were entrapped by police.

Our laws bolstered and emboldened those who wanted to attack non-conforming sexual desire.

Our laws made private and consensual sex between same-sex partners a criminal offence, leading to the unjust arrest, conviction, and imprisonment of Canadians. This criminalization would have lasting impacts for things like employment, volunteering, and travel.

Those arrested and charged were purposefully and vindictively shamed. Their names appeared in newspapers in order to humiliate them, and their families.

Lives were destroyed. And tragically, lives were lost.

And this didn’t end in 1969 with the partial decriminalization of homosexual sex. Up until 1988, a twenty year old gay man who had sex with another man could still be convicted of a crime.

But the imprisonment and criminalization of LGBTQ2 individuals wasn’t the end of it. Other methods of oppression have been rampant throughout our society for generations.

Homophobia during the time of the AIDS crisis generated hysteria and propagated fear of gay men.

Books and magazines were stopped at the border under the guise of obscenity offences and customs regulations – the content of words and images deemed unacceptable.

And LGBTQ2 families have had to fight their own government for the right to benefits, and the freedom to marry, often at great personal cost.

Over our history, laws and policies enacted by the government led to the legitimization of much more than inequality – they legitimized hatred and violence, and brought shame to those targeted.

While we may view modern Canada as a forward-thinking, progressive nation, we can’t forget our past: The state orchestrated a culture of stigma and fear around LGBTQ2 communities. And in doing so, destroyed people’s lives.

Mr. Speaker, a Purge that lasted decades will forever remain a tragic act of discrimination suffered by Canadian citizens at the hands of their own government.

From the 1950s to the early 1990s, the Government of Canada exercised its authority in a cruel and unjust manner, undertaking a campaign of oppression against members, and suspected members, of the LGBTQ2 communities.

The goal was to identify these workers throughout the public service, including the foreign service, the military, and the RCMP, and persecute them.

You see, the thinking of the day was that all non-heterosexual Canadians would automatically be at an increased risk of blackmail by our adversaries due to what was called “character weakness”.

This thinking was prejudiced and flawed. And sadly, what resulted was nothing short of a witch-hunt.

The public service, the military, and the RCMP spied on their own people, inside and outside of the workplaces. Canadians were monitored for anything that could be construed as homosexual behaviour, with community groups, bars, parks, and even people’s homes constantly under watch.

During this time, the federal government even dedicated funding to an absurd device known as the Fruit Machine – a failed technology that was supposed to measure homosexual attraction. This project was funded with the intention of using it against Canadians.

When the government felt that enough evidence had accumulated, some suspects were taken to secret locations in the dark of night to be interrogated.

They were asked invasive questions about their relationships and sexual preferences. Hooked up to polygraph machines, these law-abiding public servants had the most intimate details of their lives cut open.

Women and men were abused by their superiors, and asked demeaning, probing questions about their sex lives. Some were sexually assaulted.

Those who admitted they were gay were fired, discharged, or intimidated into resignation. They lost dignity, lost careers, and had their dreams – and indeed, their lives – shattered.

Many were blackmailed to report their peers, forced to turn against their friends and colleagues.

Some swore they would end their relationships if they could keep their jobs. Pushed deeper into the closet, they lost partners, friends, and dignity.

Those who did not lose their jobs were demoted, had security clearances revoked, and were passed over for promotions.

Under the harsh glare of the spotlight, people were forced to make an impossible choice between career and identity.

The very thing Canadian officials feared – blackmail of LGBTQ2 employees – was happening. But it wasn’t at the hands of our adversaries; it was at the hands of our own government.

Mr. Speaker, the number one job of any government is to keep its citizens safe. And on this, we have failed LGBTQ2 people, time and time again.

It is with shame and sorrow and deep regret for the things we have done that I stand here today and say: We were wrong. We apologize. I am sorry. We are sorry.

For state-sponsored, systemic oppression and rejection, we are sorry.

For suppressing two-spirit Indigenous values and beliefs, we are sorry.

For abusing the power of the law, and making criminals of citizens, we are sorry.

For government censorship, and constant attempts to undermine your community-building;

For denying you equality, and forcing you to constantly fight for this equality, often at great cost;

For forcing you to live closeted lives, for rendering you invisible, and for making you feel ashamed –

We are deeply sorry. We were so very wrong.

To all the LGBTQ2 people across this country who we have harmed in countless ways, we are sorry.

To those who were left broken by a prejudiced system;

And to those who took their own lives – we failed you.

For stripping you of your dignity;

For robbing you of your potential;

For treating you like you were dangerous, indecent, and flawed;

We are sorry.

To the victims of The Purge, who were surveilled, interrogated, and abused;

Who were forced to turn on their friends and colleagues;

Who lost wages, lost health, and lost loved ones;

We betrayed you. And we are so sorry.

To those who were fired, to those who resigned, and to those who stayed at a great personal and professional cost;

To those who wanted to serve, but never got the chance to because of who you are – you should have been permitted to serve your country, and you were stripped of that option.

We are sorry. We were wrong.

Indeed, all Canadians missed out on the important contributions you could have made to our society.

You were not bad soldiers, sailors, airmen and women. You were not predators. And you were not criminals.

You served your country with integrity, and veterans you are.

You are professionals. You are patriots. And above all, you are innocent. And for all your suffering, you deserve justice, and you deserve peace.

It is our collective shame that you were so mistreated. And it is our collective shame that this apology took so long – many who suffered are no longer alive to hear these words. And for that, we are truly sorry.

To the loved ones of those who suffered;

To the partners, families, and friends of the people we harmed;

For upending your lives, and for causing you such irreparable pain and grief – we are sorry.

And as we apologize for our painful mistakes, we must also say thank you to those who spoke up.

To those who pushed back when it was unpopular, and even dangerous, to do so. People from across the country, from all walks of life, and of all political stripes. We stand here today in awe of your courage, and we thank you.

We also thank members of the We Demand an Apology Network, our LGBTQ2 Apology Advisory Council, the Just Society Committee for Egale, as well as the individuals who have long advocated for this overdue apology.

Through them, we’ve understood that we can’t simply paint over this part of our history. To erase this dark chapter would be a disservice to the community, and to all Canadians.

We will work with the academic community and stakeholders to ensure that this history is known and publically accessible.

We must remember, and we will remember. We will honour and memorialize the legacy of those who fought before us in the face of unbearable hatred and danger.

Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that we will look back on today as a turning point. But there is still much work to do.

Discrimination against LGBTQ2 communities is not a moment in time, but an ongoing, centuries-old campaign.

We want to be a partner and ally to LGBTQ2 Canadians in the years going forward. There are still real struggles facing these communities, including for those who are intersex, queer people of colour, and others who suffer from intersectional discrimination.

Transgender Canadians are subjected to discrimination, violence, and aggression at alarming rates. In fact, trans people didn’t even have explicit protection under federal human rights legislation until this year.

Mental health issues and suicides are higher among LGBTQ2 youth as a result of discrimination and harassment, and the homelessness rates among these young people is staggering.

And there is still work to do on blood and organ donation, and the over criminalization of HIV non-disclosure. The Government needs to continue working with our partners to improve policies and programs.

But there are important and significant changes coming – the repeal of section 159 of the Criminal Code is working its way through the House.

And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that earlier today in this House we tabled the Expungement of Historically Unjust Convictions Act. This will mean that Canadians previously convicted of consensual sexual activity with same-sex partners will have their criminal records permanently destroyed.

Further, I am pleased to announce that over the course of the weekend, we reached an Agreement-in-Principle with those involved in the class action lawsuit for actions related to “The Purge”.

Never again will our government be the source of so much pain for members of the LGBTQ2 communities.

We promise to consult and work with individuals and communities to right these wrongs and begin to rebuild trust. We will ensure that there are systems in place so that these kinds of hateful practices are a thing of the past. Discrimination and oppression of LGBTQ2 Canadians will not be tolerated anymore.

With dialogue and with understanding, we will move forward together. But we can’t do it alone.

The changing of hearts and minds is a collective effort. We need to work together, across jurisdictions, with Indigenous peoples and LGBTQ2 communities, to make the crucial progress that LGBTQ2 Canadians deserve.

Mr. Speaker, Canada’s history is far from perfect.

But we believe in acknowledging and righting past wrongs so that we can learn from them.

For all our differences, for all our diversity, we can find love and support in our common humanity.

We’re Canadians, and we want the very best for each other, regardless of our sexual orientation, or our gender identity and expression. We will support one another in our fight for equality.

And Canada will stand tall on the international stage as we proudly advocate for equal rights for LGBTQ2 communities around the world.

To the kids who are listening at home and who fear rejection because of their sexual orientation or their gender identity and expression;

And to those who are nervous and scared, but also excited at what their future might hold;

We are all worthy of love, and deserving of respect.

And whether you discover your truth at 6 or 16 or 60, who you are is valid.

To members of the LGBTQ2 communities, young and old, here in Canada and around the world:

You are loved. And we support you.

Canada gets a little bit stronger every day that we choose to embrace, and to celebrate, who we are in all our uniqueness. We are a diverse nation, and we are enriched by the lives, experiences, and contributions of people who are gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, queer, and two-spirit.

To the trailblazers who have lived and struggled, and to those who have fought so hard to get us to this place: thank you for your courage, and thank you for lending your voices. I hope you look back on all you have done with pride.

It is because of your courage that we’re here today, together, and reminding ourselves that we can, and must, do better.

For the oppression of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and two-spirit communities, we apologize. On behalf of the government, Parliament, and the people of Canada: We were wrong. We are sorry. And we will never let this happen again.

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

Good afternoon.

Mr. President, fellow delegates, friends.

Before I begin, I would like to offer Canada’s condolences, in the light of Tuesday’s earthquake in Mexico, to all families and friends in mourning.

We wish a speedy recovery for all those who have been injured, and thank all first responders for their tireless efforts to help keep people safe.

Our thoughts are also with our friends in the Caribbean who continue to suffer from devastating hurricanes.

The generosity and resilience that millions have shown in the face of these natural disasters is an inspiration to the world, and Canada stands ready to lend a helping hand in whatever way it can.

It is an honour to be back here with you today, and to have an opportunity to speak to this year’s theme: “Focusing on people: striving for peace and a decent life for all on a sustainable planet.”

People. Peace. A good quality of life, and caring for our environment.

Fairness for people no matter where they live.

These things that matter deeply to Canadians.

We have, throughout our history, worked hard to secure them.

At home and around the world.

I’d like to share with you today some of the difficult lessons that Canada has learned along the way.

Canada is not a wonderland, free of the challenges you face.

We face many of the same challenges that you do.

Canada remains a work in progress.

So I want to tell you about the Canadian experience because for all the mistakes we’ve made, we remain hopeful.

Hopeful that we can do better, and be better, and treat each other with the dignity and the respect that is the birthright of every human being.

I want to tell you our story because I know that the challenges we have faced – and continue to face – are not unique in the world.

And neither are the solutions.

An approach that values human dignity – that emphasizes fairness and real opportunity for everyone – has a home in Canada and in every country.

It’s an approach that doesn’t just serve domestic needs, but that makes the world a better, more peaceful, more prosperous place for all.

This year, in 2017, Canada celebrated the 150th anniversary of Confederation. Our 150th birthday, if you will.

But Canada is much older than that.

It has been home to the descendants of settlers and immigrants for hundreds of years, and Indigenous Peoples for millennia.

We are a country built on different cultures, different religions, different languages all coming together.

That diversity has become our great strength.

But that is not and has not always been true for everyone who shares our land.

Canada is built on the ancestral land of Indigenous Peoples – but regrettably, it’s also a country that came into being without the meaningful participation of those who were there first.

And even where treaties had been formed to provide a foundation for proper relations, they have not been fully honoured or implemented.

For First Nations, Metis Nation and Inuit peoples in Canada, those early colonial relationships were not about strength through diversity, or a celebration of our differences.

For Indigenous Peoples in Canada, the experience was mostly one of humiliation, neglect, and abuse.

Of a government that didn’t respect their traditions and strengths, or their distinct governments and laws, but instead denied and undermined their rights and their dignity.

That sought to overwrite their distinct histories, to eradicate their distinct languages and cultures, and to impose colonial traditions and ways of life.

That discarded the Indigenous imperative to protect the land and water, of always thinking seven generations ahead.

In doing so, we rejected the very notion that whole generations of Indigenous Peoples have the right to define for themselves what a decent life might be.

And we robbed Canada of the contributions these generations would have made to growing our great country.

The failure of successive Canadian governments to respect the rights of Indigenous Peoples in Canada is our great shame.

And for many Indigenous Peoples, this lack of respect for their rights persists to this day.

There are, today, children living on reserve in Canada who cannot safely drink, or bathe in, or even play in the water that comes out of their taps.

There are Indigenous parents who say goodnight to their children, and have to cross their fingers in the hopes that their kids won’t run away, or take their own lives in the night.

Young Indigenous people in Canada struggle to get a good education.

And though residential schools are thankfully a thing of the past, too many Indigenous youth are still sent away, far from their families, just to get the basic education most Canadians take for granted.

And for far too many Indigenous women, life in Canada includes threats of violence so frequent and severe that Amnesty International has called it “a human rights crisis.”

That is the legacy of colonialism in Canada.

Of a paternalistic Indian Act.

Of the forced relocation of Inuit and First Nations communities, and a systematic denial of Métis rights and history.

Of residential schools that separated children as young as five years old from their families, punished them for speaking their own language, and sought to extinguish Indigenous cultures entirely.

The good news is that Canadians get it. They see the inequities. They’re fed up with the excuses.

And that impatience gives us a rare and precious opportunity to act.

We now have before us an opportunity to deliver true, meaningful and lasting reconciliation between Canada and First Nations, the Métis Nation, and Inuit peoples.

And as we embark upon that process of reconciliation, we are guided by the minimum standards adopted here, in this chamber, ten years ago this month.

I know that Canada has a complicated history with the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

We actively campaigned and voted against it, then endorsed it in the most half-hearted way possible, calling it an “aspirational document.”

The Declaration is not an aspirational document. It means much more than that to the Indigenous Peoples and others who worked so hard, for so long, to bring the Declaration to life.

In the words of Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the Declaration provides “the necessary principles, norms, and standards for reconciliation to flourish in twenty-first-century Canada.”

That’s not an aspiration. That’s a way forward.


Last year, at the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Canada’s then Minister of Indigenous and Northern Affairs finally corrected Canada’s position on the Declaration, and announced that we are now a full supporter of the Declaration, without qualification.

In partnership with Indigenous Peoples, we’re moving ahead with a thorough review of federal laws, policies, and operational practices, to get our house in order.

To make sure that our government is meeting its obligations, including international obligations under the Declaration.

We know that the world expects Canada to strictly adhere to international human rights standards – including the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples – and that is what we expect of ourselves, too.

We are working closely with Indigenous Peoples in Canada to better respond to their priorities, to better understand how they see and define self-determination, and to support their work of nation rebuilding.

Along with Indigenous partners, we are co-developing programs to ensure the preservation, protection and revitalization of Métis, Inuit and First Nations languages.

In short, we have been working hard, in partnership with other orders of government, and with lndigenous leaders in Canada, to correct past injustices and bring about a better quality of life for Indigenous Peoples in Canada.

I’ll give you a few examples.

Many will sound familiar to you, because they are closely aligned with the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals – goals that apply to all of our countries, without exception.

Our efforts include investments to help bring safe and clean drinking water to all Indigenous communities – part of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goal #6: clean water and sanitation.

So far, more than two dozen long-term drinking water advisories in Indigenous communities have been eliminated, and we have a plan to bring to an end those that remain.

Our efforts also include new investments to close the gap in First Nations education, and new education agreements that recognize the power and authority of First Nations communities.

And these agreements recognize First Nations’ authority to develop and control education systems – systems run in communities, by communities, and for communities.

These are all important steps toward SDG #4: quality education.

Beyond that, for many Indigenous Peoples in Canada, these investments will lay the groundwork for progress on SDG #8: decent work and economic growth.

We know that no one can have a real and fair chance at success without the things that make success possible: good health; strong communities; good, well-paying jobs; a quality education, and safe and affordable places to live.

Clearly, that includes Indigenous Peoples, too.

That’s why our efforts include working with Indigenous communities to help build and refurbish homes.

Construction work on nearly 4,000 homes has been completed or is underway, helping to fulfill SDG #11: making communities safe and sustainable places to live.

And across the country, we are also working on a National Housing Strategy, to give more Canadians access to housing that is safe, adequate, and affordable.

Our efforts also include a stronger focus – in Indigenous communities, across Canada, and around the world – on SDG #5: combatting gender-based violence and giving women and girls equal opportunities to succeed.

We need women and girls to succeed because that’s how we grow stronger economies, and build stronger communities.

That is why our government will be moving forward shortly with legislation to ensure equal pay for work of equal value.

You see, the Sustainable Development Goals are as meaningful in Canada as they are everywhere else in the world, and we are committed to implementing them at home while we also work with our international partners to achieve them around the world.

This is important, because poverty and hunger know no borders. We cannot pretend that these solvable challenges happen only on distant shores.

The need for greater equality and decent work – those are real and persistent human needs. Ones we cannot afford to ignore, especially in our own countries.

We are challenged, every one of us, to provide better opportunities for all people, including Indigenous Peoples.

We are challenged by the fact that true equality is unconditional.

Equality applies to every person. No matter their gender, or where they were born, or how they worship, or whom they choose to love.

And the need to better care for the environment we all share … well, as I said here at the signing ceremony for the Paris Agreement, “in every possible sense, we are all in this together.”

We are all in this together, and the relationships we build need to reflect this reality.

In Canada, this means new relationships between the government of Canada and Indigenous Peoples – relationships based on recognition of rights, respect, co-operation and partnership.

Recently, we made changes to our own government structures, to help with the transition to these new relationships with Indigenous Peoples.

We are dismantling the old colonial bureaucratic structures and creating a new Department of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs, led by Dr. Carolyn Bennett, an experienced and effective advocate for Indigenous Peoples in Canada.

In her new role, she will lead our government’s efforts to better support Indigenous Peoples as they strengthen their distinct political, cultural, legal and economic institutions, and assume autonomy over their own affairs, including the recognition and implementation of self-government as an expression of self-determination.

At the same time, we recognize that in Canada, the federal government has a historic responsibility for providing services to Indigenous Peoples, and an ongoing role to play.

To better do this work – while at the same time supporting Indigenous self-determination – we will create, in consultation with Indigenous Peoples, a new Department of Indigenous Services, led by our former Minister of Health, Dr. Jane Philpott.

Over time, programs and services will increasingly be delivered by Indigenous Peoples, as part of their move toward true self-government, and the full implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

We believe that this division is the best way for Canada to meet more of its SDG obligations at home, while advancing the principle of self-determination that is at the heart of the Declaration.

There is no blueprint for this kind of change.

There is no road map we can follow.

But neither can we wait.

The time has come to forge new paths together.

To move beyond the limitations of old and outdated colonial structures, and to create in their place something new, something that respects the inherent right of Indigenous Peoples to self-govern, and to determine their own future.

For the federal government, this means making changes to how we operate. The departmental change I mentioned is part of fulfilling that responsibility.

For Indigenous Peoples, it means taking a hard look at how they define and govern themselves as nations and governments, and how they seek to relate to other orders of government.

Indigenous Peoples will decide how they wish to represent and organize themselves.

Some may choose to engage with our government based on historic nations and treaties, others will use different shared experiences as the basis for coming together.

The choice is theirs. This is precisely what self-determination demands.

Though this path is uncharted, I am confident that we will reach a place of reconciliation.

That we will get to a place as a country where nation-to-nation, government-to-government, and Inuit-Crown relationships can be transformed.

A place where the standards enshrined in the UN Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples are fully realized – not merely by government mandate, but in true partnership with Indigenous Peoples.

Part of that new partnership will involve addressing the shared challenge of climate change.

Indigenous and northern communities are particularly affected by its stark reality.

In communities across the north – places like Paulatuk, Kugluktuk, and Tuktoyaktuk – where community members are finding sea ice conditions more dangerous and unpredictable for travelling and hunting in the winter.

In Canada’s western Arctic, the permafrost is melting and huge pieces of tundra are eroding into the ocean.

And around Baffin Island, Inuit elders are finding it difficult to forecast the weather like they used to. So difficult that many are now reluctant even to try.

At home, we are working hard to help these communities adapt and prepare for the future.

At the international level, our commitment is unwavering.

There is no country on this planet that can walk away from the reality of climate change.

And for our part, Canada will continue to fight for the global plan that has a realistic chance of countering it.

We have a responsibility to future generations, and we will uphold it.

We have a chance to build in Canada – and in fact, all around the world – economies that are clean, that are growing, that are forward-looking. We will not let that opportunity pass us by.

In Canada, that means putting a price on carbon pollution. Done well, it’s the most effective way to reduce emissions while continuing to grow the economy.

It also means continuing to work with other countries in support of our shared goals.

Last week, we welcomed environmental leaders from more than 30 countries to a working session in Montréal, where we talked about how to advance the Paris Agreement and continue the global shift toward a more sustainable future for all people.

Likewise, the global community has a responsibility to do all that it can to reduce inequality within and among countries.

In Canada, we are working hard to achieve this goal.

We improved child benefit payments. Our new program gives nine out of ten families more money to help with the high cost of raising their kids, and because of that, we expect to reduce child poverty in Canada by 40%.

We raised taxes on the wealthiest one percent so that we could lower them for the middle class, and we’re continuing to look for ways to make our tax system more fair.

Right now we have a system that encourages wealthy Canadians to use private corporations to pay a lower tax rate than middle class Canadians.

That’s not fair, and we’re going to fix it.

We’re investing to help make education more affordable and more accessible, so that every Canadian can get the training they need to find and keep a good, well-paying job.

This is especially important at a time when automation is challenging traditional ideas of work.

Internationally, we have reaffirmed Canada’s commitment to reducing poverty and inequality, putting gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls at the heart of our development efforts.

We took this approach because we know that when we empower women and girls, economic growth follows.

Peace and cooperation takes root.

And a better quality of life for families and communities is possible.

We are also working hard to deliver progressive trade agreements like the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement with the European Union, which comes into effect today.

CETA will expand opportunities for businesses; create good, well-paying jobs for workers; and deliver meaningful economic growth – the kind of growth that benefits all our citizens, not just the wealthiest.

We have the opportunity – and I would argue we have the responsibility – to ensure that trade agreements include strong provisions to safeguard workers’ rights, to protect the environment, and to ensure that the benefits of trade are felt more broadly.

Because when we do that, we don’t just grow our economies – we live up to our values.

And we say to ourselves and to each other that good enough… just isn’t good enough. That better is always possible.

And better is always possible when we put people at the heart of the decisions we make.

A focus on people – as the theme for this General Debate reminds us – is the best way to build a peaceful and prosperous future.

It’s a future we all want – for ourselves, and our children, and our grandchildren.

It’s a future that Indigenous Peoples in Canada, and around the world, deserve to share in – as full and equal partners.

And it’s a future we can build, if we work together.

Our efforts to build a better relationship with Indigenous Peoples in Canada are not only about righting historical wrongs.

They are about listening, and learning, and working together. They are also about concrete action for the future.

The reconciliation we seek has lessons for us all.

We can’t build strong relationships if we refuse to have conversations.

We can’t chart a more peaceful path if the starting point is suspicion and mistrust.

And we can’t build a better world unless we work together, respect our differences, protect the vulnerable, and stand up for the things that matter most.

As I said last year, we know it will be hard work.

But I remain confident – for Canada’s experience shows this to be true – that any challenge can be met if we meet it together.

Thank you.

Thank you all for being here today.

Last week I had the honour of meeting with Her Majesty The Queen, in Scotland.

It was a particularly poignant visit, taking place as it did during both the 150th anniversary of Confederation, and the 65th year of Her Majesty’s service as Canada’s Head of State.

It was a meeting that gave us an opportunity to talk about our shared history and a chance to reflect on what the coming years might look like.

We know that later this year, the steady and trusted leadership of The Queen’s current representative in Canada, His Excellency the Right Honourable David Johnston, will come to an end.

After seven years of service marked by hard work, grace, and humility, His Excellency will be retiring this fall.

When his appointment was first announced back in 2010, Prime Minister Stephen Harper said that the Governor General “represents the best of Canada.”

That was true then, and it is true now.

We will always be grateful for the contributions the Governor General and Mrs. Johnston have made in service to our country, and we wish them all the best in the years ahead.

Which brings us to today’s announcement.

I am very pleased to announce that, on my recommendation, Her Majesty The Queen has graciously approved the appointment of Ms. Julie Payette as the next Governor General of Canada.

Already well known to Canadians, Ms. Payette has made her mark as an accomplished scientist, jet pilot, athlete, public policy scholar, musician, and science and technology advocate.

She is undoubtedly best known for her ground-breaking work as a leader in Canada’s space program.

Ms. Payette served as an astronaut with the Canadian Space Agency for more than a decade.

She was Canada’s Chief Astronaut from 2000 to 2007, and the second Canadian woman to enter space.

And, in 2009, she proudly represented all Canadians during our first visit to the International Space Station.

Many of you probably remember watching as Ms. Payette and seven other prominent Canadians carried the Olympic Flag during the opening ceremonies in Vancouver in 2010.

Ms. Payette’s life has been one dedicated to discovery, to dreaming big, and to always staying focused on the things that matter most.

These truly Canadian traits, along with her years of public service, make her unquestionably qualified for this high office.

I know she will be an excellent Governor General and I am looking forward to her installation ceremony this fall, when she will formally become Canada’s 29th Governor General since Confederation.

It is my privilege to now introduce Canada’s Governor General Designate: Ms. Julie Payette.

Hello everyone! Happy Canada Day!

What a crowd!

You know, I’m pretty confident that we’re breaking records here on Parliament Hill. And we should be, because today, together, we’recelebrating Canada 150!

I’d like to acknowledge that we are on the ancestral lands of the Algonquin people.

And I want to start with a thank you. To the hundreds of thousands here on the Hill and across our nation’s capital, thank you for being here.

And to the millions more, in your homes across the country, maybe watching through the screen door while trying not to burn the hot dog buns on the barbecue; or chilling with friends and neighbours in the local park, festooned in red and white, thank you for joining us, and for celebrating with us today.

And to our expat friends and family, gathered in far-off places like the Maple Leaf Pub in London or the Big Bite in Hong Kong, thanks for joining us, we love you and miss you right back! And I have no idea what time it is where you are, but cheers!

And of course, I’d also like to thank Their Royal Highnesses, The Prince of Wales and The Duchess of Cornwall for being with us today to mark this tremendous celebration.

150 years since Confederation.

A nice, round number that’s as good a reason as any to celebrate. To throw a massive party and invite the friends and neighbours. To reflect on our past, to cheer on today, and to recommit ourselves to the future. But let’s not kid ourselves: this isn't really our 150th birthday.

We’re much older than that: Canada, and the idea of Canada, goes much further back than just 150 years. For thousands of years, in this place, people have met, traded, built, loved, lost, fought, grieved. They built strong communities, worked hard to build better lives for their kids, and learned to lean on their neighbours to get through our long cold winter nights, to thrive in the daunting landscapes that stretch across Turtle Island.

For centuries, families have chosen to build their lives in Canada, in many cases embarking on great journeys in search of a better future. And because of the support of those who were already here, it was possible to achieve individual success and build strong communities.

So of course, Canada is a lot older than 150 years. But, let’s be honest, Canada is young as well.

You see, many people will tell you that our nation was only truly born a hundred years ago, when for the first time Canadians of all backgrounds were joined, to fight and die and win together at a faraway place called Vimy Ridge.

The valour we defined that day would echo through names like Dieppe, Juno, Kandahar, and so many others.

But we took our place on the world stage, too, through constructive engagement: from the crisis in the Suez to the floor of the UN. By welcoming the world to come see who we are, as we figured out for ourselves with Expos 67 and 86. With Olympic Games in Montreal, in Calgary, in Vancouver.

But if we’re going to talk sports, maybe we became a nation with the Summit Series, in ’72, where ‘we all squeezed the stick and we all pulled the trigger.’

Or was it in ’65, when we chose our beloved Maple Leaf flag?

Maybe it didn't really happen until we brought home the Constitution, and defined ourselves through the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, a mere 35 years ago.

So really, I guess 150 years is as good a date as any, because it lets us really celebrate all of that, and more, today.

In 1867, Confederation became a reality thanks to the compromise and vision of people like John A. Macdonald and George-Étienne Carter.

What began as a partnership between four provinces became something much greater; a country that is extraordinary, prosperous and generous. A land of possibility.

Canada has been blessed with leaders of all stripes who recognized how special this place is. Leaders who believed in the Canadian dream, who built railways and highways and seaways to connect us to each other, and to the world. These projects became the backbone of Canada; infrastructure worthy of a great nation.

But the story of Canada should not be confined to grand acts of nation building. The story of Canada is really the story of ordinary people doing extraordinary things.

The valour of Francis Pegahmagabow. The courage of Viola Desmond. The leadership of Thérèse Casgrain. The tenacity of Terry Fox.

It’s in these people that the true story of Canada is told. Their triumphs are unique, but the values that underpin them are Canadian values.

William Lyon Mackenzie King once said that citizenship is public service “in one form or another”. He was right. Being a citizen of Canada goes hand in hand with serving Canada. With believing in something bigger than ourselves, and giving back of our time in support of it.

Because this country has given us so much to be grateful for.

Millions of people from around the world have chosen Canada as their home. Millions more were born into such luck.

Many of us grew up here. We made childhood friends here, we fell in love here, raised our kids here. My friends, the one of the greatest gifts we’ve ever been given is the gift of Canadian citizenship.

Louis St. Laurent referred to Canada as a place where people joined their talents without merging their identities. And it’s true.

Canada is a country made strong not in spite of our differences but because of them. We don’t aspire to be a melting pot – indeed, we know true strength and resilience flows through Canadian diversity.

Ours is a land of original peoples and of newcomers. And our greatest pride is that you can come here from anywhere in the world, build a good life, and be part of our community. We don’t care where you’re from or what religion you practice or whom you love. You are all welcome in Canada.

But let’s not forget that if Canada is a truly multicultural and open place today, it’s not by chance.

Indeed, the very unity of our country 150 years ago hinged on the acceptance of multiple languages and cultures.

It hinged on the peaceful coexistence – and active cooperation – between people who were different from one another.

Over time, the bilingual character of our country became a central and definitive part of our identity – and an official policy.

We speak French and English, with hundreds more languages spoken from coast to coast to coast.

And so, diversity has been at the very core of Canada for centuries. It’s the foundation on which our country was built.

We may be of every colour and creed, from every corner of the world...

We may live in British Columbia. Yukon. Alberta. The Northwest Territories. Saskatchewan. Manitoba. Nunavut. Ontario. Quebec. New Brunswick. Prince Edward Island. Nova Scotia. Or Newfoundland and Labrador.

But we embrace that diversity, while knowing in our hearts that we are all Canadians, and that we share a common pride in that red and white flag.

Yet, as we trace our history, we know that our record is far from perfect.

We know that, while many of us celebrate Canada 150, others do not.

Indigenous Peoples in this country have faced oppression for centuries – since early explorers believed they had found a new world.

As a society, we must acknowledge and apologize for past wrongs, and chart a path forward – one that promises a bright future for all Canadians.

We’ve got a long way to go to make things right with Indigenous Peoples in Canada. But we have begun that journey, together.

Canada 150 gives us reason to reflect, not only on our success, but also on our remaining challenges. And in doing so, we vow to set a new course for the next 150 years – one in which a nation-to-nation, Inuit-to-Crown, and government-to-government relationship with Indigenous Peoples is a top priority.

This is what we have to remember: We can achieve reconciliation. But in order to get there, we must educate ourselves, dedicate our efforts to progress, and work very, very hard to see it through, over the coming years and decades.

It is a choice we make, not because of what we did, or were, but because of who we are.

Let us be known the world over for our integrity, for our compassion, and for our never-ending desire to be better, so we can do better.

That’s the Canadian way.

Whether it was building a railway through the Rockies or a quantum computer, Canadians know that better is always possible.

As we know, the success of Canada did not happen by accident, and it won’t continue without effort.

Our job now is to advance equal opportunity to ensure that each and every Canadian has a real and fair chance at success.

We must create the right conditions so that the middle class, and those working hard to join it, can build a good life for themselves and their families.

And we have to work together to combat climate change, one of the greatest crises facing our planet. It’s up to us to leave our kids and grandkids with a better future – through a present in which protecting our environment is an obligation, not an option.

And we can do it. I know we can.

My friends, many of you have come here from great distances.

So take a second. Look around. And really take in this moment. You are all a part of history.

150 years? Nah. Look at us: Canada is being born today.

And thanks to all of you, will be again tomorrow.

You know, when we set out into the world, many of us do so with a maple leaf sewn onto our backpacks. But all of us already have that maple leaf graven onto our souls. It’s a subtle, quiet pride in knowing that we are blessed to be citizens of Canada, the best country on Earth.

So be proud of our accomplishments.

Be proud of our country.

For this is Canada.

And this is home.

Consider:

The price they paid.

The burden they bore.

The country they made.  

Seven thousand and four Canadians were wounded in the battle that began here, 100 years ago today. Three thousand, five hundred and ninety-eight Canadians died.

This, from a population, in 1917, of just eight million.

Think of it, for a moment. The enormity of the price they paid.

These were, for the most part, young men in their late teens and early twenties. Not professional soldiers. But they were superbly trained. And supported by months of painstaking preparation.   

Yet for all that, they still required courage – to a degree that is hard to fathom.  

They weren’t impervious to fear, these men. They were human. Homesick, tired, footsore and cold.  

Yet still, they advanced. Uphill, through mud. Under fire. They advanced, fighting like lions, moving just behind a devastating allied artillery barrage.

And they did not stop. They did not stop, until they had victory.

There were strategic objectives. Vimy is high ground. It had been transformed into a fortress.

But if you read the accounts of the men who fought here, you’ll find they focused on other things.  

They wrote to loved ones. They thanked them for parcels and letters. They asked about brothers and sisters. And they wrote about their fellow soldiers – those who’d fallen. Those still fighting.

Typical Canadians, they talked about the weather.

“The sun has been shining a couple times this last week,” reads a letter from William Henry Bell, dated April 7th, 1917. “The sun is a kind of stranger here. Say, that cake you sent was sure fine.”

William Bell died at Vimy, April 10th, 1917. He was twenty.

The burden, they bore.  

And, the country they made.

Because this, too, is why we’re here. Why we remember.

For in their ultimate sacrifice, these ordinary, yet extraordinary, men of the British dominion fought for the first time as the people of one country. Francophone, Anglophone. New Canadians. Indigenous Peoples. Side by side, united here at Vimy in the four divisions of the Canadian Corps.  

It is by their sacrifice that Canada became an independent signatory to the Treaty of Versailles.

In that sense, Canada was born here.

The sculpture of Canada Bereft is an emblem of a nation’s grief. It’s an emblem of loving care – which evokes also the thousands of Canadian women who bravely answered the call, serving as nurses, or who provided critical support at home.

But this monument is also symbolic of Canada’s birth – and our enduring commitment to peace. As I see the faces gathered here – veterans, caregivers, so many young people – I can’t help but feel a torch is being passed. One hundred years later, we must say this, together. And we must believe it: Never again.

Friends and honoured guests, let us hold to the grace of William Henry Bell. To the grace of the ones who stood by their friends, through unimaginable hardship. Through death itself.

And who, in that offering, stood by their country. And made their country, in its beginnings.

They were Canadians. They were valiant, beyond measure.

Honour them. 

Good evening.

Thank you Dan, for the kind introduction. And thank you all for being here. To the many policy makers and industry leaders here today, thank you.

And, of course, to the organizers of CERAWeek – thank you so much for this award. It truly is an honour – for me personally, for Canada’s superb natural resources minister, Jim Carr, who is here today, and for the government of Canada.

I’d like to begin with a little family history, if I may.

You may have heard that my father, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, was also Prime Minister of Canada, back in the seventies and early eighties. In 1980, I was in my prime Star Wars years. Nine or so. Politics was not the first thing on my mind.

But that year, my dad’s government introduced a policy called the NEP. The National Energy Program. It lasted until 1985. And it didn’t work. It was a failure. It didn’t mean to be. But it ended up being the wrong policy at the wrong time.

Now, I’m not being disloyal when I say this. It’s just a historical fact. The NEP introduced a level of state control over energy that hurt growth and jobs. It became hugely controversial.

Consequently, when I began my run for leadership in 2012, 30 years later, the Trudeau name was mud in Alberta, still. A Trudeau, it was said, could not get elected dog catcher in Alberta.

But here’s the thing. I understood – we understood – that there is no path to prosperity in Canada that does not include a thriving, vibrant energy sector – both traditional, and renewable. We understood that our resource industries provide thousands of well-paying, middle-class jobs – not just in Alberta, but across Canada and around the world. And, by the way, here in Texas, too.

The Enbridge-Spectra merger, which creates one of the largest energy infrastructure companies on this continent, is only the most recent example of an extraordinarily productive partnership. Last year alone, Texas trade with Canada was worth $35.1-billion US dollars. Texas exports to Canada were worth nearly $20-billion US dollars. Imports from Canada, $15-billion US dollars. That translates into thousands of good, Texan jobs, my friends. By our reckoning, about 460,000. Not bad.  

The ties between our two countries are economic – and also strategic. This is the most successful economic relationship in the world, supporting millions of middle class jobs on both sides of the border. Canada buys more from America than does any other country. We are the number one customer of two thirds of U.S. states – and in the top three for 48 states.  

Nothing is more essential to the U .S. economy than access to a secure, reliable source of energy. Canada is that source. We have the third largest oil reserves in the world, and provide more than 40 per cent of America’s imported crude. And this extends beyond oil: we supply you with more electricity and uranium than any other country, too.

My point is just this: Canadians, cold-weather dwellers that we are, “get” the importance of energy. So, immediately upon launching my leadership campaign, I went to Calgary. I think quite a few people, including quite a few in my own party, thought I was crazy.

But, guess what?  A little over four years later, with a handful of Trudeau Liberals elected across Alberta, we’re on our way  to getting three new pipeline projects under way, which will help connect Canada’s oil patch with energy markets around the world.

The first, Kinder Morgan’s Trans Mountain line, will run from Alberta, across the Rockies to the Pacific. The second, TransCanada’s Keystone XL pipeline, recently approved by President Trump, will ship Canadian crude to refineries here in Texas. And there’s Enbridge’s Line 3 replacement, that also goes south. These ambitious projects will go a long way towards ensuring North American energy security – for years to come.

I make no bones about it: we’re proud of this. It’s progress. It’s important. As I said on that first trip to the oil patch back in 2012: no country would find 173 billion barrels of oil and just leave it in the ground. The resource will be developed. Our job is to ensure this is done responsibly, safely and sustainably.

Which brings me to the second piece, equally critical: while developing our resources, for the economic benefit of Canadians, we must also look to the future.

There will come a day, far off but inevitable at some point, when traditional energy sources will no longer be needed. In preparing for that day, we have two critical responsibilities. One is to sustain the planet between now and then, so that we can pass this treasure on to our children – better than we found it. The second is to get ahead of the curve on innovation.

And we in Canada are doing that. Canadian companies are leaders in developing technologies such as carbon capture, next-generation biofuels, advanced batteries for electric cars and cleaner oil-sands extraction processes, among other advances. This creates good jobs. It also helps the planet.

Here’s the crux of it: in Canada, as I said, we know all about preparing for winter and the long, cold nights. When we go camping – and we love to camp, that’s one stereotype that is totally accurate, by the way – we light our campfires before the sun goes down. That doesn’t make us anti-daylight.

It’s a bit the same with energy. Innovating – and pursuing renewables – isn’t somehow in competition with more traditional resources. It’s common sense. It’s wise preparation for the future. Our children and their children deserve no less.

All of which brings me full circle: we would not be on this path – not even close – had we not insisted that environmental protection and resource development go hand in hand. 

In the 21st Century, Canadians will not accept that we have to choose between a healthy planet and a strong economy. People want both. And they can have both. It takes compromise. It takes hard work. But it is possible.

The proof is that, a bit more than a year into our first (hopefully not our last) term of government, we have made progress on pipelines, as I mentioned, but also on a national carbon-reduction plan – which finally puts a price on carbon pollution. This was hammered out in cooperation with our provinces, equivalent to American states. It is a first step and more work needs to be done. But it is a first for our country, after years of false starts.

We could not have moved on pipelines had we not acted on climate. We could not have acted on climate had we not paid due deference to jobs, which is another way of saying, to the needs of the Canadian people – especially the middle class, and those working hard to join it.

And so this is why, my friends, I am so very pleased and honoured to receive this award. We are showing that environmental leadership and economic growth are inseparable. They are one. We are proud of the start we’ve made. And we hope it will become a model elsewhere.

Thank you.

Good evening, everyone. Thank you all for the warm welcome.

It is an honour to be here.  It’s truly a privilege just to be invited to the St. Matthew’s Day Banquet, and an even greater privilege to be one of your keynotes this evening.

I’d like to start by thanking Mayor Scholz for his gracious invitation. And to speak after Foreign Minister Gabriel is no small feat, but I’ll do my modest, Canadian best.

You know, whenmy office received the mayor’s invitation to this historic dinner, there was no question that I would attend.

Of course, this banquet’s repution precedes itself, as much for the great meal as for the mangnificent room. And I knew I had to be here because of the friendship between our two countries.

We have long been partners on the world stage.

Canadians and Germans value democracy and the rule of law. We understand the importance of international cooperation and partnership. And we share a progressive vision of the world, realizing the immense potential that comes with embracing change.

I talk a lot about how our goal as a government is to help the middle class and those working hard to join it. That, ultimately, was the vision for change that elected us. Regular Canadians were worried about their future, and we made a promise to support them through these uncertain times.

But that worry – that anxiety – isn’t unique to Canada. It’s everywhere.

Too many people around the world are anxious about what the future may hold.

And who could blame them?

With the pace of globalization and technological change, there is a very real fear out there that our kids will be worse off than we are. That they won’t have the same kind of opportunities that we have, despite being generally much more educated, and infinitely more tech-savvy.

Citizens across the political spectrum are looking for guidance. They’re looking for leadership. They’re looking for a voice.

And so far, they’re feeling a little let down.

When companies post record profits on the backs of workers consistently refused full-time work – and the job security that comes with it – people get defeated.

And when governments serve special interests  instead of the citizens interests who elected them – people lose faith.

Increasing inequality has made citizens distrust their governments. Distrust their employers.

It turns into “Us” vs. “Them”.

And we’re watching that anxiety transform into anger on an almost daily basis.

It follows that people’s natural defence mechanism is to hunker down and recoil inward. To give into cynicism. To retreat from one another.

But it’s time for us, as leaders in politics and business, to step up. It’s time to get real about the challenges facing the middle class, and those working hard to join it. Whether your goal is to build a successful company, or lead a respected and effective government, it’s time to realize that the old approaches don’t work anymore.

We can’t go about things the same way and expect to succeed in this new world.

People are looking for leadership. It’s up to each of us to determine what kind of leadership they find.

People don’t need leaders to tell them they have problems.

People need leaders to help them build solutions together.

I want to use this speech to challenge us. To highlight that the challenges we’re facing require real action and real leadership. And I’m choosing to do it here in Germany because I know you get that. On values, on approach, on inclusive success you’re on the right track and inspiring others to follow.

But we all need to do more.

For business leaders, it’s about thinking beyond your short term responsibility to your shareholders. You have an equally important responsibility to your workers, their families, and the communities that support you.

It’s time to pay a living wage. To pay your taxes. And give your workers the benefits – and peace of mind – that come with stable, full-time contracts.

You can’t build loyalty into corporate culture when people feel overworked and undervalued. You must give your workers avenues to update and modernize their skills for a changing world.

You must be part of the communities where you operate, realizing that these towns and cities support you, and you must, in turn, support them.

And when you hear that an employee is expecting a child, congratulate her, don’t make her question whether or not she’ll have a job to come back to.

And you must ensure your workplace, and especially your boardrooms, reflect the full diversity of society.

It’s time to take a broader view of employee-employer relationships. One that treats workers as partners in success.

Now, I fully appreciate the irony of preaching about the struggles of the middle class to a sea of tuxedoes and ball gowns, while wearing a bow-tie myself.

But this discussion needs to happen. We need to realize our collective responsibility – to the people who elected us. To the people who put their faith and trust in us.

The answers are not in this room. They’re out there. We all need to leave this place, and truly listen to people who are anxious about their futures.

Hear first-hand about their concerns, work with them to develop solutions, and actually implement them.

The hard work of change begins with each and every one of us – around our boardrooms, our water coolers, and our Parliaments.

As for Parliaments, let me tell you a little bit about what we’ve done in ours, in Canada.

We know that we are far from perfect, but what success we’ve had didn’t happen by accident and won’t continue without effort. So what I’ve done over the past years is listen to people talk about their worries. About the fact that the rising tide no longer seems to lift all boats.

In Canada, we’ve taken some steps to help allay that anxiety. To help people deal with the uncertainty of a changing world.

For example, we raised taxes on the wealthiest one per cent, so we could cut taxes for the middle class.

We improved child benefit payments into one single, monthly, tax free Canada Child Benefit. This initiative has given 9 out of 10 families more money to help with the high costs of raising their kids. Because of that, we’re on track to reduce child poverty by around 40 per cent in our country.

We’re increasing the amount of assistance Canadian students can get, helping to make post-secondary education more affordable.

And we’re investing in a range of training and employment programs for unemployed and underemployed Canadian workers, allowing them to upgrade their skills so they’re ready for the modern workforce.

These are just a handful of the things we’ve done to help people adapt to and absorb the changes we’re all feeling.

We could not have done this without listening to Canadians.

In fact, I’ve spent the last month and a half back at home on a cross-Canada tour. Over the past few weeks, I’ve done about a dozen town halls, filling arenas and community centres, and took questions for hours. On anything and everything. Nothing scripted, nothing staged. Just heard directly from middle class Canadians about the things they were worried about. And, more importantly, I heard what they needed from my government to help.

Now, for the politicians in the room, it probably sounds like a high risk proposition to answer a host of questions for hours on end. It was unpredictable and, at times, very intense. But it’s only in having those tough conversations that we can get at the heart of what matters.

To everyone here, I leave you with this. Better is always possible. But we have to make better happen.

We’re not going to get it right everyday.

But Canadians and Germans need to continue to lead by example.

Whether you’re a business or a government, it’s time to realize that this anger and anxiety we see washing over the world is coming from a very real place. And it’s not going away.

We can no longer brush aside the concerns of our workers and our citizens. We have to address the root cause of their worries, and get real about how the changing economy is impacting peoples’ lives.

Ladies and gentlemen, we can all play a role in making the transition to the new economy a smooth one. And it starts with listening.

Let’s be better, because we know we can do better.

For our citizens, for our workers, and for the entire world.

Thank you.

Introduction

President Tusk, President Tajani, distinguished Parliamentarians, ladies and gentlemen.

Good morning. It is a privilege to be here today. I’m told that this marks the first address to the EU Parliament by a sitting Canadian Prime Minister, so thank you for allowing me this honour.

As you know, I was in Brussels not too long ago to formally sign the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, and the Strategic Partnership Agreement.

Alongside President Tusk, President Juncker, and Prime Minister Fico, we took an important step towards deepening our relationship and expanding free and progressive trade between Canada and the European Union.

And yesterday, we took another huge step.

One that was decades in the making.

Canada-EU relationship and shared values

This year, we celebrate 41 years since the diplomatic mission of the European Commission was established in Ottawa.

And over the course of our historic partnership, Canada and the EU have stood side-by-side on the things that matter.

Things like maintaining global security.

Advancing the values of peace and justice.

And ensuring our peoples’ prosperity through trade and investment.

We’ve worked together on issues like climate change, and the rights of women and girls around the world.

And, ladies and gentlemen, I am confident that we will achieve tremendous things together in the years to come – for the countries we represent, and, most importantly, for the people we serve.

The European Union is a truly remarkable achievement, and an unprecedented model for peaceful cooperation. Canada knows that an effective European voice on the global stage isn’t just preferable – it’s essential.

We know that the EU is the world’s largest donor of development and humanitarian assistance, and that, together, your member states represent one of the world’s largest economies. Not only that, but you are a vital, central player in addressing the challenges that we collectively face as an international community. 

Indeed, the whole world benefits from a strong EU.

On behalf of Canadians, thank you for your continued, respectful engagement with our country. Indeed, the Canada-EU relationship has become an exemplary demonstration of international collaboration.

I’d like to thank Canada’s current Ambassador to the EU, Dan Costello, for his excellent service to our country. Dan has been tremendous in his ongoing support to our new Ambassador, the Honourable Stéphane Dion.

Stéphane, a close friend and mentor, is a man who has long fought to create a better country for all Canadians. He will proudly represent Canada with courage and conviction in this next important chapter.

Now, let me re-iterate what a tremendous honour it is for me to represent Canada in this historic chamber today. Coming to Strasbourg, and addressing you, was an important priority for me because I understand and appreciate the nature of what we have here.

I believe that the relationship between Canada and the EU is so resilient because it is centered on an important bedrock of common values. Values that shape and define us. Values that Canadians and Europeans share.

You see, collectively, we believe in democracy, transparency, and the rule of law. We believe in the recognition and respect of human rights. And we believe in inclusion, and embracing diversity.

We know that, in an increasingly connected world, we must choose to lead the international economy, not simply be subjected to its whims.

And we know that the state has an important role to play – not only in supporting its people, but also in helping to create the right conditions for progress.

And to this last point, as we have just demonstrated to the world, we, collectively, value trade, and the promise of prosperity for all our citizens that comes with it.

CETA

Yesterday – in addition to ratifying the Strategic Partnership Agreement – this Parliament voted to ratify the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement.

After years of negotiations, this important trade agreement is finally crossing the finish line. And I think we can all agree – CETA was an enormously ambitious undertaking, and will prove to be one of our greatest successes.

I’d like to express my deepest gratitude to Canada’s former Minister of International Trade – now Minister of Foreign Affairs – Chrystia Freeland; our Chief Negotiator, Steve Verheul; and their EU counterparts for their tireless efforts in getting this deal done.

And I’m confident that our new Minister of International Trade, François-Philippe Champagne, will be a strong voice for Canada on the world stage over the coming years.

Now, let’s be clear – a deal as ambitious as CETA takes a lot of hard work. Every one of us in this room knows that this wasn’t easy. It took a lot of back of forth. It took extended discussions and negotiations. Meetings in Canada, and meetings across Europe.

But the finished product is something we can all be incredibly proud of. I believe that CETA will become the blueprint for future trade deals of this magnitude and complexity.

And that’s pretty amazing.

The motto of the European Union, “United in Diversity”, is a great reminder of what can be accomplished when, despite our differences, countries come together for the mutual benefit of our people.

Now, we live in a time when some people are worried that the current system only benefits society’s narrow elite. And their concern is valid.

This anxiety towards the economy and trade – the worry that our kids won’t have access to the same jobs and opportunities that we have – can be addressed only if we ensure that trade is inclusive, and that everyone benefits. 

And this agreement – the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement – is a terrific example of just that.

Because, at its heart, CETA is a framework for trade that works for everyone.

This agreement will result in the creation of good, well-paying jobs for middle class workers. It will put food on the table for families, and help grow and strengthen our communities.

Now, let’s say you’re a budding entrepreneur with an innovative product or idea. Maybe you’re having a tough time getting access to new customers. Well, CETA has just opened the door to new markets.

And what if you’re a consumer looking to buy imported goods, but the cross-border costs are too high? Maybe you’ve had your eye on Manitobah Mukluks, a Canadian, Indigenous-founded company whose products are currently subject to a 17 percent tariff in Europe. Well, with the ratification of CETA, those tariffs are removed, and you, as a consumer, are paying less at the check out.

Trade that is free and fair means less hold up and less red tape at our borders for international transactions.

It means that manufacturers can expand their products’ global reach, gaining market share and really competing with the best in the world.

And it means that folks working in service sectors like engineering, architecture, and information technology will see greater predictability and transparency when dealing with international clients.

At the end of the day, both Canada and the EU want to do what is best for our people.

We want hardworking folks to make a good living and support their families. We want moms and dads to be able to give their kids the opportunities that they never had. We want each generation of Canadians and Europeans to be better off, and have a higher standard of living, than the one that preceded it.

And deals like CETA – which is centered on the idea of trade that is both free and fair – will get us there.

At the end of the day, by making it easier to buy and sell products, we can expand opportunities for our businesses – both back in Canada and right across the EU. We can create jobs for the middle class, and make sure that the benefits of trade reach our citizens.

Make no mistake: This isn’t just about trade, in terms of imports and exports, dollars-in and dollars-out. It’s about making people’s lives better. CETA is a comprehensive blueprint for responsible economic cooperation between countries.

This modern, forward-looking agreement reflects a truly progressive trade agenda – one that protects the ability of societies to promote the public good. For example, within CETA there are provisions for labour protection.

For responsible investment practices.

For food and consumer safety.

For forest, fishery, and aquaculture management.

And for strong environmental stewardship.

My friends, this really is one of the most sustainable, progressive trade agreements in the world. And with it, Canada and the European Union have made history.

To all members present – thank you for your hard work over the last several years in making this ambitious goal a reality. I know that all our citizens will be better served for it.

Conclusion

Canada and the European Union have been friends, partners, and allies for a very long time. And our natural, easy relationship is grounded in what we have in common.

We share goals and aspirations for a better, safer, and fairer world.

We want to do right by the workers and families we were elected to represent.

And we embrace change, seeking the opportunity to lead in a global economy that’s constantly evolving.

CETA and the SPA – these landmark agreements – are a direct reflection of those commonalities. And it will serve to benefit Canadians and Europeans alike for generations to come.

In the things we have so far agreed upon, and in the discussions that lie ahead, the Canada-EU strategic partnership will forever be rooted in respect, and with an eye to the future.

My friends and dear colleagues, it’s safe to say that this is just the beginning. For Canada and the European Union, the best is yet to come.

Thank you very much.

Mr. Speaker –

It was with shock and sadness that Canadians heard about a despicable act of terror last night in Quebec City.

By current counts, six people worshipping at the Quebec City Islamic Cultural Centre have lost their lives, with many others seriously injured.

This was a group of innocents targeted for practicing their faith. Make no mistake – this was a terrorist attack.

It was an attack on our most intrinsic and cherished values as Canadians – values of openness, diversity, and freedom of religion.

Our hearts go out to the families of the victims. These people were just that – people. Ordinary Canadians. They were brothers, uncles, fathers, and friends. These were people of faith, and of community.

And in the blink of an eye, they were robbed of their lives in an act of brutal violence.

I know that, already, there’s a deeply personal connection here, in this very House. The Member of Parliament for Louis-Hebert knew this community and has joined them at the Centre many times. He is with them now as we speak today.

And to each of my 337 colleagues in this House, Mr. Speaker, remember that we are all leaders in our communities. At times like these, our communities need our leadership. It is in these moments that we must show ourselves worthy of the honour of sitting in this place.

Reach out to your friends and neighbours. Gather your communities. Be there for your people. They need you.  

To the injured, to the family members of these innocent victims, to the people of Quebec, and to all Canadians—

Know that we will get to the bottom of this. Such senseless violence has no place in Canadian society.

I’d like to express my deepest gratitude to the first responders, and thank local law enforcement officials, local government officials, and the Government of Quebec. I can assure Canadians that we will be working closely together in the days ahead.

I’d also like to thank the many political and faith leaders from around the world who have reached out since last night’s events. Your thoughts and condolences are greatly appreciated.

Canada has long been a diverse and accepting nation. We are kind. We are generous. And we embrace one another, not in spite of our differences, but because of them.

It is in tragic moments like this that we must come together in order to move forward. Canadians will not be broken by this violence. Our sense of spirit, and our sense of unity, will only strengthen.

The people who commit these acts mean to test our resolve, and weaken our values. They aim to divide us. To sow discord and plant hatred.

We will not close our minds. We will open our hearts.

Mr. Speaker, my friends, my fellow Canadians: let us strive to be the best version of ourselves in this dark hour.

To the more than one million Canadians who profess the Muslim faith, I want to say directly:

We are with you. 36 million Canadian hearts are breaking with yours.

And know that we value you. You enrich our shared country in immeasurable ways. It is your home.

Last night’s horrible crime against the Muslim community was an act of terror committed against Canada, and against all Canadians.

We will grieve with you. We will defend you. We will love you. And we will stand with you.

Over the coming days, take solace in one another. We will mourn this devastating attack, and we will heal, together. As one community, as one country, and as one family.

Canadians will not be intimidated. We will not meet violence with more violence.

We will meet fear and hatred with love and compassion.

Always.

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.