<<<<<<< HEAD
﻿Mr.  Speaker –One of the greatest choices a person can make in their life is the choice to serve their fellow citizens.  Maybe it’s in government, in the military, or in a police force.  In whatever capacity one serves, dedicating your life to making Canada – and indeed, the world – a better place is a calling of the highest order.  Now imagine, if you will, being told that the very country you would willingly lay down your life to defend doesn’t want you.  Doesn’t accept you.  Sees you as defective.  Sees you as a threat to our national security.  Not because you can’t do the job, or because you lack patriotism or courage – no, because of who you are as a person, and because of who your sexual partners are.  Now imagine, Mr.  Speaker, being subjected to laws, policies, and hiring practices that label you as different – as “less than”. Imagine having to fight for the basic rights that your peers enjoy, over and over again. And imagine being criminalized for being who you are. This is the truth for many of the Canadians present in the Gallery today, and those listening across the country. This is the devastating story of people who were branded criminals by the government.  People who lost their livelihoods, and in some cases, their lives. These aren’t distant practices of Governments long forgotten.  This happened systematically, in Canada, with a timeline more recent than any of us would like to admit. Mr.  Speaker, today we acknowledge an often-overlooked part of Canada’s history.  Today, we finally talk about Canada’s role in the systemic oppression, criminalization, and violence against the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and two-spirit communities. And it is my hope that in talking about these injustices, vowing to never repeat them, and acting to right these wrongs, we can begin to heal. Since arriving on these shores, settlers to this land brought with them foreign standards of right and wrong – of acceptable and unacceptable behaviour.  Suitable and unsuitable partnerships. They brought rigid gender norms – norms that manifested in homophobia and transphobia.  Norms that saw the near-destruction of Indigenous LGBTQ and two-spirit identities.  People who were once revered for their identities found themselves shamed for who they were.  They were rejected and left vulnerable to violence. And discrimination against LGBTQ2 communities was quickly codified in criminal offences like “buggery”, “gross indecency”, and bawdy house provisions. Bathhouses were raided, people were entrapped by police. Our laws bolstered and emboldened those who wanted to attack non-conforming sexual desire. Our laws made private and consensual sex between same-sex partners a criminal offence, leading to the unjust arrest, conviction, and imprisonment of Canadians.  This criminalization would have lasting impacts for things like employment, volunteering, and travel. Those arrested and charged were purposefully and vindictively shamed.  Their names appeared in newspapers in order to humiliate them, and their families. Lives were destroyed.  And tragically, lives were lost. And this didn’t end in 1969 with the partial decriminalization of homosexual sex.  Up until 1988, a twenty year old gay man who had sex with another man could still be convicted of a crime. But the imprisonment and criminalization of LGBTQ2 individuals wasn’t the end of it.  Other methods of oppression have been rampant throughout our society for generations. Homophobia during the time of the AIDS crisis generated hysteria and propagated fear of gay men. Books and magazines were stopped at the border under the guise of obscenity offences and customs regulations – the content of words and images deemed unacceptable. And LGBTQ2 families have had to fight their own government for the right to benefits, and the freedom to marry, often at great personal cost. Over our history, laws and policies enacted by the government led to the legitimization of much more than inequality – they legitimized hatred and violence, and brought shame to those targeted. While we may view modern Canada as a forward-thinking, progressive nation, we can’t forget our past: The state orchestrated a culture of stigma and fear around LGBTQ2 communities.  And in doing so, destroyed people’s lives. Mr.  Speaker, a Purge that lasted decades will forever remain a tragic act of discrimination suffered by Canadian citizens at the hands of their own government. From the 1950s to the early 1990s, the Government of Canada exercised its authority in a cruel and unjust manner, undertaking a campaign of oppression against members, and suspected members, of the LGBTQ2 communities. The goal was to identify these workers throughout the public service, including the foreign service, the military, and the RCMP, and persecute them. You see, the thinking of the day was that all non-heterosexual Canadians would automatically be at an increased risk of blackmail by our adversaries due to what was called “character weakness”. This thinking was prejudiced and flawed.  And sadly, what resulted was nothing short of a witch-hunt. The public service, the military, and the RCMP spied on their own people, inside and outside of the workplaces.  Canadians were monitored for anything that could be construed as homosexual behaviour, with community groups, bars, parks, and even people’s homes constantly under watch. During this time, the federal government even dedicated funding to an absurd device known as the Fruit Machine – a failed technology that was supposed to measure homosexual attraction.  This project was funded with the intention of using it against Canadians. When the government felt that enough evidence had accumulated, some suspects were taken to secret locations in the dark of night to be interrogated. They were asked invasive questions about their relationships and sexual preferences.  Hooked up to polygraph machines, these law-abiding public servants had the most intimate details of their lives cut open. Women and men were abused by their superiors, and asked demeaning, probing questions about their sex lives.  Some were sexually assaulted. Those who admitted they were gay were fired, discharged, or intimidated into resignation.  They lost dignity, lost careers, and had their dreams – and indeed, their lives – shattered. Many were blackmailed to report their peers, forced to turn against their friends and colleagues. Some swore they would end their relationships if they could keep their jobs.  Pushed deeper into the closet, they lost partners, friends, and dignity. Those who did not lose their jobs were demoted, had security clearances revoked, and were passed over for promotions. Under the harsh glare of the spotlight, people were forced to make an impossible choice between career and identity. The very thing Canadian officials feared – blackmail of LGBTQ2 employees – was happening.  But it wasn’t at the hands of our adversaries; it was at the hands of our own government. Mr.  Speaker, the number one job of any government is to keep its citizens safe.  And on this, we have failed LGBTQ2 people, time and time again. It is with shame and sorrow and deep regret for the things we have done that I stand here today and say: We were wrong.  We apologize.  I am sorry.  We are sorry. For state-sponsored, systemic oppression and rejection, we are sorry. For suppressing two-spirit Indigenous values and beliefs, we are sorry. For abusing the power of the law, and making criminals of citizens, we are sorry. For government censorship, and constant attempts to undermine your community-building;For denying you equality, and forcing you to constantly fight for this equality, often at great cost;For forcing you to live closeted lives, for rendering you invisible, and for making you feel ashamed –We are deeply sorry.  We were so very wrong. To all the LGBTQ2 people across this country who we have harmed in countless ways, we are sorry. To those who were left broken by a prejudiced system;And to those who took their own lives – we failed you. For stripping you of your dignity;For robbing you of your potential;For treating you like you were dangerous, indecent, and flawed;We are sorry. To the victims of The Purge, who were surveilled, interrogated, and abused;Who were forced to turn on their friends and colleagues;Who lost wages, lost health, and lost loved ones;We betrayed you.  And we are so sorry. To those who were fired, to those who resigned, and to those who stayed at a great personal and professional cost;To those who wanted to serve, but never got the chance to because of who you are – you should have been permitted to serve your country, and you were stripped of that option. We are sorry.  We were wrong. Indeed, all Canadians missed out on the important contributions you could have made to our society. You were not bad soldiers, sailors, airmen and women.  You were not predators.  And you were not criminals. You served your country with integrity, and veterans you are. You are professionals.  You are patriots.  And above all, you are innocent.  And for all your suffering, you deserve justice, and you deserve peace. It is our collective shame that you were so mistreated.  And it is our collective shame that this apology took so long – many who suffered are no longer alive to hear these words.  And for that, we are truly sorry. To the loved ones of those who suffered;To the partners, families, and friends of the people we harmed;For upending your lives, and for causing you such irreparable pain and grief – we are sorry. And as we apologize for our painful mistakes, we must also say thank you to those who spoke up. To those who pushed back when it was unpopular, and even dangerous, to do so.  People from across the country, from all walks of life, and of all political stripes.  We stand here today in awe of your courage, and we thank you. We also thank members of the We Demand an Apology Network, our LGBTQ2 Apology Advisory Council, the Just Society Committee for Egale, as well as the individuals who have long advocated for this overdue apology. Through them, we’ve understood that we can’t simply paint over this part of our history.  To erase this dark chapter would be a disservice to the community, and to all Canadians. We will work with the academic community and stakeholders to ensure that this history is known and publically accessible. We must remember, and we will remember.  We will honour and memorialize the legacy of those who fought before us in the face of unbearable hatred and danger. Mr.  Speaker, it is my hope that we will look back on today as a turning point.  But there is still much work to do. Discrimination against LGBTQ2 communities is not a moment in time, but an ongoing, centuries-old campaign. We want to be a partner and ally to LGBTQ2 Canadians in the years going forward.  There are still real struggles facing these communities, including for those who are intersex, queer people of colour, and others who suffer from intersectional discrimination. Transgender Canadians are subjected to discrimination, violence, and aggression at alarming rates.  In fact, trans people didn’t even have explicit protection under federal human rights legislation until this year. Mental health issues and suicides are higher among LGBTQ2 youth as a result of discrimination and harassment, and the homelessness rates among these young people is staggering. And there is still work to do on blood and organ donation, and the over criminalization of HIV non-disclosure.  The Government needs to continue working with our partners to improve policies and programs. But there are important and significant changes coming – the repeal of section 159 of the Criminal Code is working its way through the House. And, Mr.  Speaker, I am proud to say that earlier today in this House we tabled the Expungement of Historically Unjust Convictions Act.  This will mean that Canadians previously convicted of consensual sexual activity with same-sex partners will have their criminal records permanently destroyed. Further, I am pleased to announce that over the course of the weekend, we reached an Agreement-in-Principle with those involved in the class action lawsuit for actions related to “The Purge”. Never again will our government be the source of so much pain for members of the LGBTQ2 communities. We promise to consult and work with individuals and communities to right these wrongs and begin to rebuild trust.  We will ensure that there are systems in place so that these kinds of hateful practices are a thing of the past.  Discrimination and oppression of LGBTQ2 Canadians will not be tolerated anymore. With dialogue and with understanding, we will move forward together.  But we can’t do it alone. The changing of hearts and minds is a collective effort.  We need to work together, across jurisdictions, with Indigenous peoples and LGBTQ2 communities, to make the crucial progress that LGBTQ2 Canadians deserve. Mr.  Speaker, Canada’s history is far from perfect. But we believe in acknowledging and righting past wrongs so that we can learn from them. For all our differences, for all our diversity, we can find love and support in our common humanity. We’re Canadians, and we want the very best for each other, regardless of our sexual orientation, or our gender identity and expression.  We will support one another in our fight for equality. And Canada will stand tall on the international stage as we proudly advocate for equal rights for LGBTQ2 communities around the world. To the kids who are listening at home and who fear rejection because of their sexual orientation or their gender identity and expression;And to those who are nervous and scared, but also excited at what their future might hold;We are all worthy of love, and deserving of respect. And whether you discover your truth at 6 or 16 or 60, who you are is valid. To members of the LGBTQ2 communities, young and old, here in Canada and around the world:You are loved.  And we support you. Canada gets a little bit stronger every day that we choose to embrace, and to celebrate, who we are in all our uniqueness.  We are a diverse nation, and we are enriched by the lives, experiences, and contributions of people who are gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, queer, and two-spirit. To the trailblazers who have lived and struggled, and to those who have fought so hard to get us to this place: thank you for your courage, and thank you for lending your voices.  I hope you look back on all you have done with pride. It is because of your courage that we’re here today, together, and reminding ourselves that we can, and must, do better. For the oppression of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and two-spirit communities, we apologize.  On behalf of the government, Parliament, and the people of Canada: We were wrong.  We are sorry.  And we will never let this happen again. Thank you, Mr.  Speaker. Good afternoon. Mr.  President, fellow delegates, friends. Before I begin, I would like to offer Canada’s condolences, in the light of Tuesday’s earthquake in Mexico, to all families and friends in mourning. We wish a speedy recovery for all those who have been injured, and thank all first responders for their tireless efforts to help keep people safe. Our thoughts are also with our friends in the Caribbean who continue to suffer from devastating hurricanes. The generosity and resilience that millions have shown in the face of these natural disasters is an inspiration to the world, and Canada stands ready to lend a helping hand in whatever way it can. It is an honour to be back here with you today, and to have an opportunity to speak to this year’s theme: “Focusing on people: striving for peace and a decent life for all on a sustainable planet. ”People.  Peace.  A good quality of life, and caring for our environment. Fairness for people no matter where they live. These things that matter deeply to Canadians. We have, throughout our history, worked hard to secure them. At home and around the world. I’d like to share with you today some of the difficult lessons that Canada has learned along the way. Canada is not a wonderland, free of the challenges you face. We face many of the same challenges that you do. Canada remains a work in progress. So I want to tell you about the Canadian experience because for all the mistakes we’ve made, we remain hopeful. Hopeful that we can do better, and be better, and treat each other with the dignity and the respect that is the birthright of every human being. I want to tell you our story because I know that the challenges we have faced – and continue to face – are not unique in the world. And neither are the solutions. An approach that values human dignity – that emphasizes fairness and real opportunity for everyone – has a home in Canada and in every country. It’s an approach that doesn’t just serve domestic needs, but that makes the world a better, more peaceful, more prosperous place for all. This year, in 2017, Canada celebrated the 150th anniversary of Confederation.  Our 150th birthday, if you will. But Canada is much older than that. It has been home to the descendants of settlers and immigrants for hundreds of years, and Indigenous Peoples for millennia. We are a country built on different cultures, different religions, different languages all coming together. That diversity has become our great strength. But that is not and has not always been true for everyone who shares our land. Canada is built on the ancestral land of Indigenous Peoples – but regrettably, it’s also a country that came into being without the meaningful participation of those who were there first. And even where treaties had been formed to provide a foundation for proper relations, they have not been fully honoured or implemented. For First Nations, Metis Nation and Inuit peoples in Canada, those early colonial relationships were not about strength through diversity, or a celebration of our differences. For Indigenous Peoples in Canada, the experience was mostly one of humiliation, neglect, and abuse. Of a government that didn’t respect their traditions and strengths, or their distinct governments and laws, but instead denied and undermined their rights and their dignity. That sought to overwrite their distinct histories, to eradicate their distinct languages and cultures, and to impose colonial traditions and ways of life. That discarded the Indigenous imperative to protect the land and water, of always thinking seven generations ahead. In doing so, we rejected the very notion that whole generations of Indigenous Peoples have the right to define for themselves what a decent life might be. And we robbed Canada of the contributions these generations would have made to growing our great country. The failure of successive Canadian governments to respect the rights of Indigenous Peoples in Canada is our great shame. And for many Indigenous Peoples, this lack of respect for their rights persists to this day. There are, today, children living on reserve in Canada who cannot safely drink, or bathe in, or even play in the water that comes out of their taps. There are Indigenous parents who say goodnight to their children, and have to cross their fingers in the hopes that their kids won’t run away, or take their own lives in the night. Young Indigenous people in Canada struggle to get a good education. And though residential schools are thankfully a thing of the past, too many Indigenous youth are still sent away, far from their families, just to get the basic education most Canadians take for granted. And for far too many Indigenous women, life in Canada includes threats of violence so frequent and severe that Amnesty International has called it “a human rights crisis. ”That is the legacy of colonialism in Canada. Of a paternalistic Indian Act. Of the forced relocation of Inuit and First Nations communities, and a systematic denial of Métis rights and history. Of residential schools that separated children as young as five years old from their families, punished them for speaking their own language, and sought to extinguish Indigenous cultures entirely. The good news is that Canadians get it.  They see the inequities.  They’re fed up with the excuses. And that impatience gives us a rare and precious opportunity to act. We now have before us an opportunity to deliver true, meaningful and lasting reconciliation between Canada and First Nations, the Métis Nation, and Inuit peoples. And as we embark upon that process of reconciliation, we are guided by the minimum standards adopted here, in this chamber, ten years ago this month. I know that Canada has a complicated history with the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. We actively campaigned and voted against it, then endorsed it in the most half-hearted way possible, calling it an “aspirational document. ”The Declaration is not an aspirational document.  It means much more than that to the Indigenous Peoples and others who worked so hard, for so long, to bring the Declaration to life. In the words of Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the Declaration provides “the necessary principles, norms, and standards for reconciliation to flourish in twenty-first-century Canada. ”That’s not an aspiration.  That’s a way forward. Last year, at the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Canada’s then Minister of Indigenous and Northern Affairs finally corrected Canada’s position on the Declaration, and announced that we are now a full supporter of the Declaration, without qualification. In partnership with Indigenous Peoples, we’re moving ahead with a thorough review of federal laws, policies, and operational practices, to get our house in order. To make sure that our government is meeting its obligations, including international obligations under the Declaration. We know that the world expects Canada to strictly adhere to international human rights standards – including the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples – and that is what we expect of ourselves, too. We are working closely with Indigenous Peoples in Canada to better respond to their priorities, to better understand how they see and define self-determination, and to support their work of nation rebuilding. Along with Indigenous partners, we are co-developing programs to ensure the preservation, protection and revitalization of Métis, Inuit and First Nations languages. In short, we have been working hard, in partnership with other orders of government, and with lndigenous leaders in Canada, to correct past injustices and bring about a better quality of life for Indigenous Peoples in Canada. I’ll give you a few examples. Many will sound familiar to you, because they are closely aligned with the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals – goals that apply to all of our countries, without exception. Our efforts include investments to help bring safe and clean drinking water to all Indigenous communities – part of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goal #6: clean water and sanitation. So far, more than two dozen long-term drinking water advisories in Indigenous communities have been eliminated, and we have a plan to bring to an end those that remain. Our efforts also include new investments to close the gap in First Nations education, and new education agreements that recognize the power and authority of First Nations communities. And these agreements recognize First Nations’ authority to develop and control education systems – systems run in communities, by communities, and for communities. These are all important steps toward SDG #4: quality education. Beyond that, for many Indigenous Peoples in Canada, these investments will lay the groundwork for progress on SDG #8: decent work and economic growth. We know that no one can have a real and fair chance at success without the things that make success possible: good health; strong communities; good, well-paying jobs; a quality education, and safe and affordable places to live. Clearly, that includes Indigenous Peoples, too. That’s why our efforts include working with Indigenous communities to help build and refurbish homes. Construction work on nearly 4,000 homes has been completed or is underway, helping to fulfill SDG #11: making communities safe and sustainable places to live. And across the country, we are also working on a National Housing Strategy, to give more Canadians access to housing that is safe, adequate, and affordable. Our efforts also include a stronger focus – in Indigenous communities, across Canada, and around the world – on SDG #5: combatting gender-based violence and giving women and girls equal opportunities to succeed. We need women and girls to succeed because that’s how we grow stronger economies, and build stronger communities. That is why our government will be moving forward shortly with legislation to ensure equal pay for work of equal value. You see, the Sustainable Development Goals are as meaningful in Canada as they are everywhere else in the world, and we are committed to implementing them at home while we also work with our international partners to achieve them around the world. This is important, because poverty and hunger know no borders.  We cannot pretend that these solvable challenges happen only on distant shores. The need for greater equality and decent work – those are real and persistent human needs.  Ones we cannot afford to ignore, especially in our own countries. We are challenged, every one of us, to provide better opportunities for all people, including Indigenous Peoples. We are challenged by the fact that true equality is unconditional. Equality applies to every person.  No matter their gender, or where they were born, or how they worship, or whom they choose to love. And the need to better care for the environment we all share … well, as I said here at the signing ceremony for the Paris Agreement, “in every possible sense, we are all in this together. ”We are all in this together, and the relationships we build need to reflect this reality. In Canada, this means new relationships between the government of Canada and Indigenous Peoples – relationships based on recognition of rights, respect, co-operation and partnership. Recently, we made changes to our own government structures, to help with the transition to these new relationships with Indigenous Peoples. We are dismantling the old colonial bureaucratic structures and creating a new Department of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs, led by Dr.  Carolyn Bennett, an experienced and effective advocate for Indigenous Peoples in Canada. In her new role, she will lead our government’s efforts to better support Indigenous Peoples as they strengthen their distinct political, cultural, legal and economic institutions, and assume autonomy over their own affairs, including the recognition and implementation of self-government as an expression of self-determination. At the same time, we recognize that in Canada, the federal government has a historic responsibility for providing services to Indigenous Peoples, and an ongoing role to play. To better do this work – while at the same time supporting Indigenous self-determination – we will create, in consultation with Indigenous Peoples, a new Department of Indigenous Services, led by our former Minister of Health, Dr.  Jane Philpott. Over time, programs and services will increasingly be delivered by Indigenous Peoples, as part of their move toward true self-government, and the full implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. We believe that this division is the best way for Canada to meet more of its SDG obligations at home, while advancing the principle of self-determination that is at the heart of the Declaration. There is no blueprint for this kind of change. There is no road map we can follow. But neither can we wait. The time has come to forge new paths together. To move beyond the limitations of old and outdated colonial structures, and to create in their place something new, something that respects the inherent right of Indigenous Peoples to self-govern, and to determine their own future. For the federal government, this means making changes to how we operate.  The departmental change I mentioned is part of fulfilling that responsibility. For Indigenous Peoples, it means taking a hard look at how they define and govern themselves as nations and governments, and how they seek to relate to other orders of government. Indigenous Peoples will decide how they wish to represent and organize themselves. Some may choose to engage with our government based on historic nations and treaties, others will use different shared experiences as the basis for coming together. The choice is theirs.  This is precisely what self-determination demands. Though this path is uncharted, I am confident that we will reach a place of reconciliation. That we will get to a place as a country where nation-to-nation, government-to-government, and Inuit-Crown relationships can be transformed. A place where the standards enshrined in the UN Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples are fully realized – not merely by government mandate, but in true partnership with Indigenous Peoples. Part of that new partnership will involve addressing the shared challenge of climate change. Indigenous and northern communities are particularly affected by its stark reality. In communities across the north – places like Paulatuk, Kugluktuk, and Tuktoyaktuk – where community members are finding sea ice conditions more dangerous and unpredictable for travelling and hunting in the winter. In Canada’s western Arctic, the permafrost is melting and huge pieces of tundra are eroding into the ocean. And around Baffin Island, Inuit elders are finding it difficult to forecast the weather like they used to.  So difficult that many are now reluctant even to try. At home, we are working hard to help these communities adapt and prepare for the future. At the international level, our commitment is unwavering. There is no country on this planet that can walk away from the reality of climate change. And for our part, Canada will continue to fight for the global plan that has a realistic chance of countering it. We have a responsibility to future generations, and we will uphold it. We have a chance to build in Canada – and in fact, all around the world – economies that are clean, that are growing, that are forward-looking.  We will not let that opportunity pass us by. In Canada, that means putting a price on carbon pollution.  Done well, it’s the most effective way to reduce emissions while continuing to grow the economy. It also means continuing to work with other countries in support of our shared goals. Last week, we welcomed environmental leaders from more than 30 countries to a working session in Montréal, where we talked about how to advance the Paris Agreement and continue the global shift toward a more sustainable future for all people. Likewise, the global community has a responsibility to do all that it can to reduce inequality within and among countries. In Canada, we are working hard to achieve this goal. We improved child benefit payments.  Our new program gives nine out of ten families more money to help with the high cost of raising their kids, and because of that, we expect to reduce child poverty in Canada by 40%. We raised taxes on the wealthiest one percent so that we could lower them for the middle class, and we’re continuing to look for ways to make our tax system more fair. Right now we have a system that encourages wealthy Canadians to use private corporations to pay a lower tax rate than middle class Canadians. That’s not fair, and we’re going to fix it. We’re investing to help make education more affordable and more accessible, so that every Canadian can get the training they need to find and keep a good, well-paying job. This is especially important at a time when automation is challenging traditional ideas of work. Internationally, we have reaffirmed Canada’s commitment to reducing poverty and inequality, putting gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls at the heart of our development efforts. We took this approach because we know that when we empower women and girls, economic growth follows. Peace and cooperation takes root. And a better quality of life for families and communities is possible. We are also working hard to deliver progressive trade agreements like the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement with the European Union, which comes into effect today. CETA will expand opportunities for businesses; create good, well-paying jobs for workers; and deliver meaningful economic growth – the kind of growth that benefits all our citizens, not just the wealthiest. We have the opportunity – and I would argue we have the responsibility – to ensure that trade agreements include strong provisions to safeguard workers’ rights, to protect the environment, and to ensure that the benefits of trade are felt more broadly. Because when we do that, we don’t just grow our economies – we live up to our values. And we say to ourselves and to each other that good enough… just isn’t good enough.  That better is always possible. And better is always possible when we put people at the heart of the decisions we make. A focus on people – as the theme for this General Debate reminds us – is the best way to build a peaceful and prosperous future. It’s a future we all want – for ourselves, and our children, and our grandchildren. It’s a future that Indigenous Peoples in Canada, and around the world, deserve to share in – as full and equal partners. And it’s a future we can build, if we work together. Our efforts to build a better relationship with Indigenous Peoples in Canada are not only about righting historical wrongs. They are about listening, and learning, and working together.  They are also about concrete action for the future. The reconciliation we seek has lessons for us all. We can’t build strong relationships if we refuse to have conversations. We can’t chart a more peaceful path if the starting point is suspicion and mistrust. And we can’t build a better world unless we work together, respect our differences, protect the vulnerable, and stand up for the things that matter most. As I said last year, we know it will be hard work. But I remain confident – for Canada’s experience shows this to be true – that any challenge can be met if we meet it together. Thank you. Thank you all for being here today. Last week I had the honour of meeting with Her Majesty The Queen, in Scotland. It was a particularly poignant visit, taking place as it did during both the 150th anniversary of Confederation, and the 65th year of Her Majesty’s service as Canada’s Head of State. It was a meeting that gave us an opportunity to talk about our shared history and a chance to reflect on what the coming years might look like. We know that later this year, the steady and trusted leadership of The Queen’s current representative in Canada, His Excellency the Right Honourable David Johnston, will come to an end. After seven years of service marked by hard work, grace, and humility, His Excellency will be retiring this fall. When his appointment was first announced back in 2010, Prime Minister Stephen Harper said that the Governor General “represents the best of Canada. ”That was true then, and it is true now. We will always be grateful for the contributions the Governor General and Mrs.  Johnston have made in service to our country, and we wish them all the best in the years ahead. Which brings us to today’s announcement. I am very pleased to announce that, on my recommendation, Her Majesty The Queen has graciously approved the appointment of Ms.  Julie Payette as the next Governor General of Canada. Already well known to Canadians, Ms.  Payette has made her mark as an accomplished scientist, jet pilot, athlete, public policy scholar, musician, and science and technology advocate. She is undoubtedly best known for her ground-breaking work as a leader in Canada’s space program. Ms.  Payette served as an astronaut with the Canadian Space Agency for more than a decade. She was Canada’s Chief Astronaut from 2000 to 2007, and the second Canadian woman to enter space. And, in 2009, she proudly represented all Canadians during our first visit to the International Space Station. Many of you probably remember watching as Ms.  Payette and seven other prominent Canadians carried the Olympic Flag during the opening ceremonies in Vancouver in 2010. Ms.  Payette’s life has been one dedicated to discovery, to dreaming big, and to always staying focused on the things that matter most. These truly Canadian traits, along with her years of public service, make her unquestionably qualified for this high office. I know she will be an excellent Governor General and I am looking forward to her installation ceremony this fall, when she will formally become Canada’s 29th Governor General since Confederation. It is my privilege to now introduce Canada’s Governor General Designate: Ms.  Julie Payette. Hello everyone! Happy Canada Day!What a crowd!You know, I’m pretty confident that we’re breaking records here on Parliament Hill.  And we should be, because today, together, we’recelebrating Canada 150!I’d like to acknowledge that we are on the ancestral lands of the Algonquin people. And I want to start with a thank you.  To the hundreds of thousands here on the Hill and across our nation’s capital, thank you for being here. And to the millions more, in your homes across the country, maybe watching through the screen door while trying not to burn the hot dog buns on the barbecue; or chilling with friends and neighbours in the local park, festooned in red and white, thank you for joining us, and for celebrating with us today. And to our expat friends and family, gathered in far-off places like the Maple Leaf Pub in London or the Big Bite in Hong Kong, thanks for joining us, we love you and miss you right back! And I have no idea what time it is where you are, but cheers!And of course, I’d also like to thank Their Royal Highnesses, The Prince of Wales and The Duchess of Cornwall for being with us today to mark this tremendous celebration. 150 years since Confederation. A nice, round number that’s as good a reason as any to celebrate.  To throw a massive party and invite the friends and neighbours.  To reflect on our past, to cheer on today, and to recommit ourselves to the future.  But let’s not kid ourselves: this isn't really our 150th birthday. We’re much older than that: Canada, and the idea of Canada, goes much further back than just 150 years.  For thousands of years, in this place, people have met, traded, built, loved, lost, fought, grieved.  They built strong communities, worked hard to build better lives for their kids, and learned to lean on their neighbours to get through our long cold winter nights, to thrive in the daunting landscapes that stretch across Turtle Island. For centuries, families have chosen to build their lives in Canada, in many cases embarking on great journeys in search of a better future.  And because of the support of those who were already here, it was possible to achieve individual success and build strong communities. So of course, Canada is a lot older than 150 years.  But, let’s be honest, Canada is young as well. You see, many people will tell you that our nation was only truly born a hundred years ago, when for the first time Canadians of all backgrounds were joined, to fight and die and win together at a faraway place called Vimy Ridge. The valour we defined that day would echo through names like Dieppe, Juno, Kandahar, and so many others. But we took our place on the world stage, too, through constructive engagement: from the crisis in the Suez to the floor of the UN.  By welcoming the world to come see who we are, as we figured out for ourselves with Expos 67 and 86.  With Olympic Games in Montreal, in Calgary, in Vancouver. But if we’re going to talk sports, maybe we became a nation with the Summit Series, in ’72, where ‘we all squeezed the stick and we all pulled the trigger. ’Or was it in ’65, when we chose our beloved Maple Leaf flag?Maybe it didn't really happen until we brought home the Constitution, and defined ourselves through the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, a mere 35 years ago. So really, I guess 150 years is as good a date as any, because it lets us really celebrate all of that, and more, today. In 1867, Confederation became a reality thanks to the compromise and vision of people like John A.  Macdonald and George-Étienne Carter. What began as a partnership between four provinces became something much greater; a country that is extraordinary, prosperous and generous.  A land of possibility. Canada has been blessed with leaders of all stripes who recognized how special this place is.  Leaders who believed in the Canadian dream, who built railways and highways and seaways to connect us to each other, and to the world.  These projects became the backbone of Canada; infrastructure worthy of a great nation. But the story of Canada should not be confined to grand acts of nation building.  The story of Canada is really the story of ordinary people doing extraordinary things. The valour of Francis Pegahmagabow.  The courage of Viola Desmond.  The leadership of Thérèse Casgrain.  The tenacity of Terry Fox. It’s in these people that the true story of Canada is told.  Their triumphs are unique, but the values that underpin them are Canadian values. William Lyon Mackenzie King once said that citizenship is public service “in one form or another”.  He was right.  Being a citizen of Canada goes hand in hand with serving Canada.  With believing in something bigger than ourselves, and giving back of our time in support of it. Because this country has given us so much to be grateful for. Millions of people from around the world have chosen Canada as their home.  Millions more were born into such luck. Many of us grew up here.  We made childhood friends here, we fell in love here, raised our kids here.  My friends, the one of the greatest gifts we’ve ever been given is the gift of Canadian citizenship. Louis St.  Laurent referred to Canada as a place where people joined their talents without merging their identities.  And it’s true. Canada is a country made strong not in spite of our differences but because of them.  We don’t aspire to be a melting pot – indeed, we know true strength and resilience flows through Canadian diversity. Ours is a land of original peoples and of newcomers.  And our greatest pride is that you can come here from anywhere in the world, build a good life, and be part of our community.  We don’t care where you’re from or what religion you practice or whom you love.  You are all welcome in Canada. But let’s not forget that if Canada is a truly multicultural and open place today, it’s not by chance. Indeed, the very unity of our country 150 years ago hinged on the acceptance of multiple languages and cultures. It hinged on the peaceful coexistence – and active cooperation – between people who were different from one another. Over time, the bilingual character of our country became a central and definitive part of our identity – and an official policy. We speak French and English, with hundreds more languages spoken from coast to coast to coast. And so, diversity has been at the very core of Canada for centuries.  It’s the foundation on which our country was built. We may be of every colour and creed, from every corner of the world. . . We may live in British Columbia.  Yukon.  Alberta.  The Northwest Territories.  Saskatchewan.  Manitoba.  Nunavut.  Ontario.  Quebec.  New Brunswick.  Prince Edward Island.  Nova Scotia.  Or Newfoundland and Labrador. But we embrace that diversity, while knowing in our hearts that we are all Canadians, and that we share a common pride in that red and white flag. Yet, as we trace our history, we know that our record is far from perfect. We know that, while many of us celebrate Canada 150, others do not. Indigenous Peoples in this country have faced oppression for centuries – since early explorers believed they had found a new world. As a society, we must acknowledge and apologize for past wrongs, and chart a path forward – one that promises a bright future for all Canadians. We’ve got a long way to go to make things right with Indigenous Peoples in Canada.  But we have begun that journey, together. Canada 150 gives us reason to reflect, not only on our success, but also on our remaining challenges.  And in doing so, we vow to set a new course for the next 150 years – one in which a nation-to-nation, Inuit-to-Crown, and government-to-government relationship with Indigenous Peoples is a top priority. This is what we have to remember: We can achieve reconciliation.  But in order to get there, we must educate ourselves, dedicate our efforts to progress, and work very, very hard to see it through, over the coming years and decades. It is a choice we make, not because of what we did, or were, but because of who we are. Let us be known the world over for our integrity, for our compassion, and for our never-ending desire to be better, so we can do better. That’s the Canadian way. Whether it was building a railway through the Rockies or a quantum computer, Canadians know that better is always possible. As we know, the success of Canada did not happen by accident, and it won’t continue without effort. Our job now is to advance equal opportunity to ensure that each and every Canadian has a real and fair chance at success. We must create the right conditions so that the middle class, and those working hard to join it, can build a good life for themselves and their families. And we have to work together to combat climate change, one of the greatest crises facing our planet.  It’s up to us to leave our kids and grandkids with a better future – through a present in which protecting our environment is an obligation, not an option. And we can do it.  I know we can. My friends, many of you have come here from great distances. So take a second.  Look around.  And really take in this moment.  You are all a part of history. 150 years? Nah.  Look at us: Canada is being born today. And thanks to all of you, will be again tomorrow. You know, when we set out into the world, many of us do so with a maple leaf sewn onto our backpacks.  But all of us already have that maple leaf graven onto our souls.  It’s a subtle, quiet pride in knowing that we are blessed to be citizens of Canada, the best country on Earth. So be proud of our accomplishments. Be proud of our country. For this is Canada. And this is home. Consider:The price they paid. The burden they bore. The country they made.   Seven thousand and four Canadians were wounded in the battle that began here, 100 years ago today.  Three thousand, five hundred and ninety-eight Canadians died. This, from a population, in 1917, of just eight million. Think of it, for a moment.  The enormity of the price they paid. These were, for the most part, young men in their late teens and early twenties.  Not professional soldiers.  But they were superbly trained.  And supported by months of painstaking preparation.    Yet for all that, they still required courage – to a degree that is hard to fathom.   They weren’t impervious to fear, these men.  They were human.  Homesick, tired, footsore and cold.   Yet still, they advanced.  Uphill, through mud.  Under fire.  They advanced, fighting like lions, moving just behind a devastating allied artillery barrage. And they did not stop.  They did not stop, until they had victory. There were strategic objectives.  Vimy is high ground.  It had been transformed into a fortress. But if you read the accounts of the men who fought here, you’ll find they focused on other things.   They wrote to loved ones.  They thanked them for parcels and letters.  They asked about brothers and sisters.  And they wrote about their fellow soldiers – those who’d fallen.  Those still fighting. Typical Canadians, they talked about the weather. “The sun has been shining a couple times this last week,” reads a letter from William Henry Bell, dated April 7th, 1917.  “The sun is a kind of stranger here.  Say, that cake you sent was sure fine. ”William Bell died at Vimy, April 10th, 1917.  He was twenty. The burden, they bore.   And, the country they made. Because this, too, is why we’re here.  Why we remember. For in their ultimate sacrifice, these ordinary, yet extraordinary, men of the British dominion fought for the first time as the people of one country.  Francophone, Anglophone.  New Canadians.  Indigenous Peoples.  Side by side, united here at Vimy in the four divisions of the Canadian Corps.   It is by their sacrifice that Canada became an independent signatory to the Treaty of Versailles. In that sense, Canada was born here. The sculpture of Canada Bereft is an emblem of a nation’s grief.  It’s an emblem of loving care – which evokes also the thousands of Canadian women who bravely answered the call, serving as nurses, or who provided critical support at home. But this monument is also symbolic of Canada’s birth – and our enduring commitment to peace.  As I see the faces gathered here – veterans, caregivers, so many young people – I can’t help but feel a torch is being passed.  One hundred years later, we must say this, together.  And we must believe it: Never again. Friends and honoured guests, let us hold to the grace of William Henry Bell.  To the grace of the ones who stood by their friends, through unimaginable hardship.  Through death itself. And who, in that offering, stood by their country.  And made their country, in its beginnings. They were Canadians.  They were valiant, beyond measure. Honour them.  Good evening. Thank you Dan, for the kind introduction.  And thank you all for being here.  To the many policy makers and industry leaders here today, thank you. And, of course, to the organizers of CERAWeek – thank you so much for this award.  It truly is an honour – for me personally, for Canada’s superb natural resources minister, Jim Carr, who is here today, and for the government of Canada. I’d like to begin with a little family history, if I may. You may have heard that my father, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, was also Prime Minister of Canada, back in the seventies and early eighties.  In 1980, I was in my prime Star Wars years.  Nine or so.  Politics was not the first thing on my mind. But that year, my dad’s government introduced a policy called the NEP.  The National Energy Program.  It lasted until 1985.  And it didn’t work.  It was a failure.  It didn’t mean to be.  But it ended up being the wrong policy at the wrong time. Now, I’m not being disloyal when I say this.  It’s just a historical fact.  The NEP introduced a level of state control over energy that hurt growth and jobs.  It became hugely controversial. Consequently, when I began my run for leadership in 2012, 30 years later, the Trudeau name was mud in Alberta, still.  A Trudeau, it was said, could not get elected dog catcher in Alberta. But here’s the thing.  I understood – we understood – that there is no path to prosperity in Canada that does not include a thriving, vibrant energy sector – both traditional, and renewable.  We understood that our resource industries provide thousands of well-paying, middle-class jobs – not just in Alberta, but across Canada and around the world.  And, by the way, here in Texas, too. The Enbridge-Spectra merger, which creates one of the largest energy infrastructure companies on this continent, is only the most recent example of an extraordinarily productive partnership.  Last year alone, Texas trade with Canada was worth $35. 1-billion US dollars.  Texas exports to Canada were worth nearly $20-billion US dollars.  Imports from Canada, $15-billion US dollars.  That translates into thousands of good, Texan jobs, my friends.  By our reckoning, about 460,000.  Not bad.   The ties between our two countries are economic – and also strategic.  This is the most successful economic relationship in the world, supporting millions of middle class jobs on both sides of the border.  Canada buys more from America than does any other country.  We are the number one customer of two thirds of U. S.  states – and in the top three for 48 states.   Nothing is more essential to the U . S.  economy than access to a secure, reliable source of energy.  Canada is that source.  We have the third largest oil reserves in the world, and provide more than 40 per cent of America’s imported crude.  And this extends beyond oil: we supply you with more electricity and uranium than any other country, too. My point is just this: Canadians, cold-weather dwellers that we are, “get” the importance of energy.  So, immediately upon launching my leadership campaign, I went to Calgary.  I think quite a few people, including quite a few in my own party, thought I was crazy. But, guess what?  A little over four years later, with a handful of Trudeau Liberals elected across Alberta, we’re on our way  to getting three new pipeline projects under way, which will help connect Canada’s oil patch with energy markets around the world. The first, Kinder Morgan’s Trans Mountain line, will run from Alberta, across the Rockies to the Pacific.  The second, TransCanada’s Keystone XL pipeline, recently approved by President Trump, will ship Canadian crude to refineries here in Texas.  And there’s Enbridge’s Line 3 replacement, that also goes south.  These ambitious projects will go a long way towards ensuring North American energy security – for years to come. I make no bones about it: we’re proud of this.  It’s progress.  It’s important.  As I said on that first trip to the oil patch back in 2012: no country would find 173 billion barrels of oil and just leave it in the ground.  The resource will be developed.  Our job is to ensure this is done responsibly, safely and sustainably. Which brings me to the second piece, equally critical: while developing our resources, for the economic benefit of Canadians, we must also look to the future. There will come a day, far off but inevitable at some point, when traditional energy sources will no longer be needed.  In preparing for that day, we have two critical responsibilities.  One is to sustain the planet between now and then, so that we can pass this treasure on to our children – better than we found it.  The second is to get ahead of the curve on innovation. And we in Canada are doing that.  Canadian companies are leaders in developing technologies such as carbon capture, next-generation biofuels, advanced batteries for electric cars and cleaner oil-sands extraction processes, among other advances.  This creates good jobs.  It also helps the planet. Here’s the crux of it: in Canada, as I said, we know all about preparing for winter and the long, cold nights.  When we go camping – and we love to camp, that’s one stereotype that is totally accurate, by the way – we light our campfires before the sun goes down.  That doesn’t make us anti-daylight. It’s a bit the same with energy.  Innovating – and pursuing renewables – isn’t somehow in competition with more traditional resources.  It’s common sense.  It’s wise preparation for the future.  Our children and their children deserve no less. All of which brings me full circle: we would not be on this path – not even close – had we not insisted that environmental protection and resource development go hand in hand.  In the 21st Century, Canadians will not accept that we have to choose between a healthy planet and a strong economy.  People want both.  And they can have both.  It takes compromise.  It takes hard work.  But it is possible. The proof is that, a bit more than a year into our first (hopefully not our last) term of government, we have made progress on pipelines, as I mentioned, but also on a national carbon-reduction plan – which finally puts a price on carbon pollution.  This was hammered out in cooperation with our provinces, equivalent to American states.  It is a first step and more work needs to be done.  But it is a first for our country, after years of false starts. We could not have moved on pipelines had we not acted on climate.  We could not have acted on climate had we not paid due deference to jobs, which is another way of saying, to the needs of the Canadian people – especially the middle class, and those working hard to join it. And so this is why, my friends, I am so very pleased and honoured to receive this award.  We are showing that environmental leadership and economic growth are inseparable.  They are one.  We are proud of the start we’ve made.  And we hope it will become a model elsewhere. Thank you. Good evening, everyone.  Thank you all for the warm welcome. It is an honour to be here.   It’s truly a privilege just to be invited to the St.  Matthew’s Day Banquet, and an even greater privilege to be one of your keynotes this evening. I’d like to start by thanking Mayor Scholz for his gracious invitation.  And to speak after Foreign Minister Gabriel is no small feat, but I’ll do my modest, Canadian best. You know, whenmy office received the mayor’s invitation to this historic dinner, there was no question that I would attend. Of course, this banquet’s repution precedes itself, as much for the great meal as for the mangnificent room.  And I knew I had to be here because of the friendship between our two countries. We have long been partners on the world stage. Canadians and Germans value democracy and the rule of law.  We understand the importance of international cooperation and partnership.  And we share a progressive vision of the world, realizing the immense potential that comes with embracing change. I talk a lot about how our goal as a government is to help the middle class and those working hard to join it.  That, ultimately, was the vision for change that elected us.  Regular Canadians were worried about their future, and we made a promise to support them through these uncertain times. But that worry – that anxiety – isn’t unique to Canada.  It’s everywhere. Too many people around the world are anxious about what the future may hold. And who could blame them?With the pace of globalization and technological change, there is a very real fear out there that our kids will be worse off than we are.  That they won’t have the same kind of opportunities that we have, despite being generally much more educated, and infinitely more tech-savvy. Citizens across the political spectrum are looking for guidance.  They’re looking for leadership.  They’re looking for a voice. And so far, they’re feeling a little let down. When companies post record profits on the backs of workers consistently refused full-time work – and the job security that comes with it – people get defeated. And when governments serve special interests  instead of the citizens interests who elected them – people lose faith. Increasing inequality has made citizens distrust their governments.  Distrust their employers. It turns into “Us” vs.  “Them”. And we’re watching that anxiety transform into anger on an almost daily basis. It follows that people’s natural defence mechanism is to hunker down and recoil inward.  To give into cynicism.  To retreat from one another. But it’s time for us, as leaders in politics and business, to step up.  It’s time to get real about the challenges facing the middle class, and those working hard to join it.  Whether your goal is to build a successful company, or lead a respected and effective government, it’s time to realize that the old approaches don’t work anymore. We can’t go about things the same way and expect to succeed in this new world. People are looking for leadership.  It’s up to each of us to determine what kind of leadership they find. People don’t need leaders to tell them they have problems. People need leaders to help them build solutions together. I want to use this speech to challenge us.  To highlight that the challenges we’re facing require real action and real leadership.  And I’m choosing to do it here in Germany because I know you get that.  On values, on approach, on inclusive success you’re on the right track and inspiring others to follow. But we all need to do more. For business leaders, it’s about thinking beyond your short term responsibility to your shareholders.  You have an equally important responsibility to your workers, their families, and the communities that support you. It’s time to pay a living wage.  To pay your taxes.  And give your workers the benefits – and peace of mind – that come with stable, full-time contracts. You can’t build loyalty into corporate culture when people feel overworked and undervalued.  You must give your workers avenues to update and modernize their skills for a changing world. You must be part of the communities where you operate, realizing that these towns and cities support you, and you must, in turn, support them. And when you hear that an employee is expecting a child, congratulate her, don’t make her question whether or not she’ll have a job to come back to. And you must ensure your workplace, and especially your boardrooms, reflect the full diversity of society. It’s time to take a broader view of employee-employer relationships.  One that treats workers as partners in success. Now, I fully appreciate the irony of preaching about the struggles of the middle class to a sea of tuxedoes and ball gowns, while wearing a bow-tie myself. But this discussion needs to happen.  We need to realize our collective responsibility – to the people who elected us.  To the people who put their faith and trust in us. The answers are not in this room.  They’re out there.  We all need to leave this place, and truly listen to people who are anxious about their futures. Hear first-hand about their concerns, work with them to develop solutions, and actually implement them. The hard work of change begins with each and every one of us – around our boardrooms, our water coolers, and our Parliaments. As for Parliaments, let me tell you a little bit about what we’ve done in ours, in Canada. We know that we are far from perfect, but what success we’ve had didn’t happen by accident and won’t continue without effort.  So what I’ve done over the past years is listen to people talk about their worries.  About the fact that the rising tide no longer seems to lift all boats. In Canada, we’ve taken some steps to help allay that anxiety.  To help people deal with the uncertainty of a changing world. For example, we raised taxes on the wealthiest one per cent, so we could cut taxes for the middle class. We improved child benefit payments into one single, monthly, tax free Canada Child Benefit.  This initiative has given 9 out of 10 families more money to help with the high costs of raising their kids.  Because of that, we’re on track to reduce child poverty by around 40 per cent in our country. We’re increasing the amount of assistance Canadian students can get, helping to make post-secondary education more affordable. And we’re investing in a range of training and employment programs for unemployed and underemployed Canadian workers, allowing them to upgrade their skills so they’re ready for the modern workforce. These are just a handful of the things we’ve done to help people adapt to and absorb the changes we’re all feeling. We could not have done this without listening to Canadians. In fact, I’ve spent the last month and a half back at home on a cross-Canada tour.  Over the past few weeks, I’ve done about a dozen town halls, filling arenas and community centres, and took questions for hours.  On anything and everything.  Nothing scripted, nothing staged.  Just heard directly from middle class Canadians about the things they were worried about.  And, more importantly, I heard what they needed from my government to help. Now, for the politicians in the room, it probably sounds like a high risk proposition to answer a host of questions for hours on end.  It was unpredictable and, at times, very intense.  But it’s only in having those tough conversations that we can get at the heart of what matters. To everyone here, I leave you with this.  Better is always possible.  But we have to make better happen. We’re not going to get it right everyday. But Canadians and Germans need to continue to lead by example. Whether you’re a business or a government, it’s time to realize that this anger and anxiety we see washing over the world is coming from a very real place.  And it’s not going away. We can no longer brush aside the concerns of our workers and our citizens.  We have to address the root cause of their worries, and get real about how the changing economy is impacting peoples’ lives. Ladies and gentlemen, we can all play a role in making the transition to the new economy a smooth one.  And it starts with listening. Let’s be better, because we know we can do better. For our citizens, for our workers, and for the entire world. Thank you. IntroductionPresident Tusk, President Tajani, distinguished Parliamentarians, ladies and gentlemen. Good morning.  It is a privilege to be here today.  I’m told that this marks the first address to the EU Parliament by a sitting Canadian Prime Minister, so thank you for allowing me this honour. As you know, I was in Brussels not too long ago to formally sign the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, and the Strategic Partnership Agreement. Alongside President Tusk, President Juncker, and Prime Minister Fico, we took an important step towards deepening our relationship and expanding free and progressive trade between Canada and the European Union. And yesterday, we took another huge step. One that was decades in the making. Canada-EU relationship and shared valuesThis year, we celebrate 41 years since the diplomatic mission of the European Commission was established in Ottawa. And over the course of our historic partnership, Canada and the EU have stood side-by-side on the things that matter. Things like maintaining global security. Advancing the values of peace and justice. And ensuring our peoples’ prosperity through trade and investment. We’ve worked together on issues like climate change, and the rights of women and girls around the world. And, ladies and gentlemen, I am confident that we will achieve tremendous things together in the years to come – for the countries we represent, and, most importantly, for the people we serve. The European Union is a truly remarkable achievement, and an unprecedented model for peaceful cooperation.  Canada knows that an effective European voice on the global stage isn’t just preferable – it’s essential. We know that the EU is the world’s largest donor of development and humanitarian assistance, and that, together, your member states represent one of the world’s largest economies.  Not only that, but you are a vital, central player in addressing the challenges that we collectively face as an international community.  Indeed, the whole world benefits from a strong EU. On behalf of Canadians, thank you for your continued, respectful engagement with our country.  Indeed, the Canada-EU relationship has become an exemplary demonstration of international collaboration. I’d like to thank Canada’s current Ambassador to the EU, Dan Costello, for his excellent service to our country.  Dan has been tremendous in his ongoing support to our new Ambassador, the Honourable Stéphane Dion. Stéphane, a close friend and mentor, is a man who has long fought to create a better country for all Canadians.  He will proudly represent Canada with courage and conviction in this next important chapter. Now, let me re-iterate what a tremendous honour it is for me to represent Canada in this historic chamber today.  Coming to Strasbourg, and addressing you, was an important priority for me because I understand and appreciate the nature of what we have here. I believe that the relationship between Canada and the EU is so resilient because it is centered on an important bedrock of common values.  Values that shape and define us.  Values that Canadians and Europeans share. You see, collectively, we believe in democracy, transparency, and the rule of law.  We believe in the recognition and respect of human rights.  And we believe in inclusion, and embracing diversity. We know that, in an increasingly connected world, we must choose to lead the international economy, not simply be subjected to its whims. And we know that the state has an important role to play – not only in supporting its people, but also in helping to create the right conditions for progress. And to this last point, as we have just demonstrated to the world, we, collectively, value trade, and the promise of prosperity for all our citizens that comes with it. CETAYesterday – in addition to ratifying the Strategic Partnership Agreement – this Parliament voted to ratify the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement. After years of negotiations, this important trade agreement is finally crossing the finish line.  And I think we can all agree – CETA was an enormously ambitious undertaking, and will prove to be one of our greatest successes. I’d like to express my deepest gratitude to Canada’s former Minister of International Trade – now Minister of Foreign Affairs – Chrystia Freeland; our Chief Negotiator, Steve Verheul; and their EU counterparts for their tireless efforts in getting this deal done. And I’m confident that our new Minister of International Trade, François-Philippe Champagne, will be a strong voice for Canada on the world stage over the coming years. Now, let’s be clear – a deal as ambitious as CETA takes a lot of hard work.  Every one of us in this room knows that this wasn’t easy.  It took a lot of back of forth.  It took extended discussions and negotiations.  Meetings in Canada, and meetings across Europe. But the finished product is something we can all be incredibly proud of.  I believe that CETA will become the blueprint for future trade deals of this magnitude and complexity. And that’s pretty amazing. The motto of the European Union, “United in Diversity”, is a great reminder of what can be accomplished when, despite our differences, countries come together for the mutual benefit of our people. Now, we live in a time when some people are worried that the current system only benefits society’s narrow elite.  And their concern is valid. This anxiety towards the economy and trade – the worry that our kids won’t have access to the same jobs and opportunities that we have – can be addressed only if we ensure that trade is inclusive, and that everyone benefits.  And this agreement – the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement – is a terrific example of just that. Because, at its heart, CETA is a framework for trade that works for everyone. This agreement will result in the creation of good, well-paying jobs for middle class workers.  It will put food on the table for families, and help grow and strengthen our communities. Now, let’s say you’re a budding entrepreneur with an innovative product or idea.  Maybe you’re having a tough time getting access to new customers.  Well, CETA has just opened the door to new markets. And what if you’re a consumer looking to buy imported goods, but the cross-border costs are too high? Maybe you’ve had your eye on Manitobah Mukluks, a Canadian, Indigenous-founded company whose products are currently subject to a 17 percent tariff in Europe.  Well, with the ratification of CETA, those tariffs are removed, and you, as a consumer, are paying less at the check out. Trade that is free and fair means less hold up and less red tape at our borders for international transactions. It means that manufacturers can expand their products’ global reach, gaining market share and really competing with the best in the world. And it means that folks working in service sectors like engineering, architecture, and information technology will see greater predictability and transparency when dealing with international clients. At the end of the day, both Canada and the EU want to do what is best for our people. We want hardworking folks to make a good living and support their families.  We want moms and dads to be able to give their kids the opportunities that they never had.  We want each generation of Canadians and Europeans to be better off, and have a higher standard of living, than the one that preceded it. And deals like CETA – which is centered on the idea of trade that is both free and fair – will get us there. At the end of the day, by making it easier to buy and sell products, we can expand opportunities for our businesses – both back in Canada and right across the EU.  We can create jobs for the middle class, and make sure that the benefits of trade reach our citizens. Make no mistake: This isn’t just about trade, in terms of imports and exports, dollars-in and dollars-out.  It’s about making people’s lives better.  CETA is a comprehensive blueprint for responsible economic cooperation between countries. This modern, forward-looking agreement reflects a truly progressive trade agenda – one that protects the ability of societies to promote the public good.  For example, within CETA there are provisions for labour protection. For responsible investment practices. For food and consumer safety. For forest, fishery, and aquaculture management. And for strong environmental stewardship. My friends, this really is one of the most sustainable, progressive trade agreements in the world.  And with it, Canada and the European Union have made history. To all members present – thank you for your hard work over the last several years in making this ambitious goal a reality.  I know that all our citizens will be better served for it. ConclusionCanada and the European Union have been friends, partners, and allies for a very long time.  And our natural, easy relationship is grounded in what we have in common. We share goals and aspirations for a better, safer, and fairer world. We want to do right by the workers and families we were elected to represent. And we embrace change, seeking the opportunity to lead in a global economy that’s constantly evolving. CETA and the SPA – these landmark agreements – are a direct reflection of those commonalities.  And it will serve to benefit Canadians and Europeans alike for generations to come. In the things we have so far agreed upon, and in the discussions that lie ahead, the Canada-EU strategic partnership will forever be rooted in respect, and with an eye to the future. My friends and dear colleagues, it’s safe to say that this is just the beginning.  For Canada and the European Union, the best is yet to come. Thank you very much. Mr.  Speaker –It was with shock and sadness that Canadians heard about a despicable act of terror last night in Quebec City. By current counts, six people worshipping at the Quebec City Islamic Cultural Centre have lost their lives, with many others seriously injured. This was a group of innocents targeted for practicing their faith.  Make no mistake – this was a terrorist attack. It was an attack on our most intrinsic and cherished values as Canadians – values of openness, diversity, and freedom of religion. Our hearts go out to the families of the victims.  These people were just that – people.  Ordinary Canadians.  They were brothers, uncles, fathers, and friends.  These were people of faith, and of community. And in the blink of an eye, they were robbed of their lives in an act of brutal violence. I know that, already, there’s a deeply personal connection here, in this very House.  The Member of Parliament for Louis-Hebert knew this community and has joined them at the Centre many times.  He is with them now as we speak today. And to each of my 337 colleagues in this House, Mr.  Speaker, remember that we are all leaders in our communities.  At times like these, our communities need our leadership.  It is in these moments that we must show ourselves worthy of the honour of sitting in this place. Reach out to your friends and neighbours.  Gather your communities.  Be there for your people.  They need you.   To the injured, to the family members of these innocent victims, to the people of Quebec, and to all Canadians—Know that we will get to the bottom of this.  Such senseless violence has no place in Canadian society. I’d like to express my deepest gratitude to the first responders, and thank local law enforcement officials, local government officials, and the Government of Quebec.  I can assure Canadians that we will be working closely together in the days ahead. I’d also like to thank the many political and faith leaders from around the world who have reached out since last night’s events.  Your thoughts and condolences are greatly appreciated. Canada has long been a diverse and accepting nation.  We are kind.  We are generous.  And we embrace one another, not in spite of our differences, but because of them. It is in tragic moments like this that we must come together in order to move forward.  Canadians will not be broken by this violence.  Our sense of spirit, and our sense of unity, will only strengthen. The people who commit these acts mean to test our resolve, and weaken our values.  They aim to divide us.  To sow discord and plant hatred. We will not close our minds.  We will open our hearts. Mr.  Speaker, my friends, my fellow Canadians: let us strive to be the best version of ourselves in this dark hour. To the more than one million Canadians who profess the Muslim faith, I want to say directly:We are with you.  36 million Canadian hearts are breaking with yours. And know that we value you.  You enrich our shared country in immeasurable ways.  It is your home. Last night’s horrible crime against the Muslim community was an act of terror committed against Canada, and against all Canadians. We will grieve with you.  We will defend you.  We will love you.  And we will stand with you. Over the coming days, take solace in one another.  We will mourn this devastating attack, and we will heal, together.  As one community, as one country, and as one family. Canadians will not be intimidated.  We will not meet violence with more violence. We will meet fear and hatred with love and compassion. Always. Thank you, Mr.  Speaker. Good afternoon. Thank you for your kind welcome. Before I begin, I’d like to recognize the Algonquin Nation, on whose traditional territory we are gathering.   We acknowledge them as the past, present and future caretakers of this land. Elders, youth, veterans, National Chief Bellegarde, members of the AFN executive and Chiefs-in-Assembly: thank you for giving me the chance to be here with you today.         It was back in January of 2013 that I watched – with deep respect and admiration – a group of young Cree leave their remote and northern Quebec community of Whapmagoostui and begin a 1600-kilometre trek through frigid weather. Like so many Canadians, I watched them make their way by snowshoe, and then by foot, during that two-month journey to Ottawa. Along the way, their numbers had grown from seven to over 400 on that morning in March when they walked into this town to the sound of traditional drums.  We all know the Journey of the Nishiyuu: the Journey of the People. I was one of many to meet them upon their arrival.   The “Original Seven”: David, Stanley, Travis, Johnny, Raymond, Geordie, and Isaac. The tenacity, the determination and boldness of spirit that fuelled these youth inspired a nation, and brought the concerns of their community to the forefront. Today, we gather in the capital of this nation, as many nations.  We gather here in this moment to reflect on the first year of the journey to build a new relationship, one based on recognition and respect. The Indigenous and Non-Indigenous Peoples of Canada have begun our own new walk together.   And together we’ve taken the first steps in what we all know is going to be a multi-generational journey. In this spirit, no one here fools him- or herself that the path our country overwhelmingly agreed to take will always be a gentle one, or an easy one.  We’ve already felt some headwinds.  And there will be more. I do not take my call for a nation-to-nation relationship with Indigenous Peoples lightly. I wake up every morning encouraged that we are finally doing this together, and each morning I wake up in anticipation of what new places we’ll find together. And each morning I wake up with fresh resolve that we will keep pushing forward, like the Nishiyuu Walkers, until we reach our destination. But unlike the Nishiyuu Walkers, who were happy to return home to their community and to the love of their families, we know that the past we are leaving behind us is not a good or happy place. For all of us gathered here who are on our trek together, there is no giving up and turning around and heading back to the place where we all just last year so strongly agreed to move away from. Not only can’t we go back there again: none of us wants to. Jody Wilson-Raybould is Canada’s first Indigenous Minister of Justice and Attorney General.   Not only is she the right person – Indigenous or otherwise – for this central role, she is our government’s loud and clear message to our country that the laws of this land that were, and in many ways still are, used to control and constrain Indigenous Peoples are now the particular responsibility of a First Nations person.   An Indigenous woman. She, along with her Cabinet colleagues, will now lead a joint effort with Indigenous Peoples, aimed at de-colonializing Canada’s laws and policies that for so long have held back, rather than recognized, Indigenous rights. My government supports the 94 calls to action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.  The work the Commission has done is some of the most important work ever in this country.   Each of the 94 needs to be implemented. Indeed, as the one-year anniversary approaches, I am pleased to confirm that progress is underway on 36 of the 45 calls to action that are under solely federal purview. We all know that addressing them thoroughly and with due diligence will take time.   I understand that many of you in this room are impatient.  I know many of the people you serve are impatient.  I am impatient too.  But I’m encouraged by the meaningful progress we’ve already made.  In May, Minister Bennett went to the UN to make clear our government’s unqualified support for the United Nations Declaration for the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.   We remain committed to its adoption and implementation in full partnership and in consultation with Indigenous Peoples. I have asked Minister Wilson-Raybould to lead the work collectively with her Cabinet colleagues and First Nations, the Métis Nation and Inuit Peoples to ensure that this gets done. Since forming government, we have lifted 14 long-term drinking water advisories in First Nations communities, and we’re on track to have nearly half of remaining advisories eliminated within three years.  We will lift all drinking water advisories in First Nations communities within our original five-year deadline. As a teacher, I’m especially excited that this year, almost 2000 students started the school year in six brand-new schools.  There are now 31 new schools under construction on reserve.  Another 27 are being designed, and a further 72 are in feasibility studies. I’m also excited that later this month, Canada’s first First Nations School Board Agreement in Manitoba is expected to be signed.   I know there are active discussions in other provinces to do the same.   And as we all know, a federal government-mandated independent inquiry has been launched into the national horror and continuing trauma of Murdered and Missing Indigenous Women and Girls.  And let me tell you one thing: to put it bluntly, this issue has always been and will always be on my radar. We need to do more.  But we have thousands of kids in new schools, we have 14 communities with clean water that didn’t have it before and have begun to get justice for sisters and daughters across the country.  All in our first year. Canadians now understand that, as Senator Murray Sinclair stated, reconciliation in this country isn’t just an Indigenous issue and problem – it is a Canadian issue and problem that we all need to address in real and concrete ways. My government and the Assembly of First Nations have worked together to make early progress – not only against an important list of recommendations, but also in a new spirit of cooperation that will bring us closer to the goal of true reconciliation. We must together show Canadians that we are working in unison to correct the historical wrongs and continuing intergenerational trauma that affects so many Indigenous Peoples. You don’t need me to tell you how much more work still needs to be done.   It is a lived experience for many of you.   And our government remains committed to making meaningful and timely progress on the issues that matter most to you and your communities. That includes working hard to close the persistent gaps that exist between Indigenous and Non-Indigenous Peoples when it comes to employment opportunities, income, and housing. It includes building the infrastructure your communities need to be safe, healthy places to live. It includes doing more to address the unique needs of Indigenous children and youth, whose desperation is matched by a desire to succeed – something that is, sadly, too often ignored until it is too late. We know all too well how residential schools and other decisions by governments were used as a deliberate tool to eliminate Indigenous languages and cultures.  If we are to truly advance reconciliation, we must undo the lasting damage that resulted. So today, I commit to you that our government will enact an Indigenous Languages Act, co-developed with Indigenous Peoples, with the goal of ensuring the preservation, protection, and revitalization of First Nations, Métis, and Inuit languages in this country. All of us gathered in this room today must never allow Canadians, including Indigenous Peoples, to think or believe that reconciliation can’t or won’t work. It is of the greatest imperative that all of us here never allow Canadians the chance to fear that due to a lack of joint leadership, of a true nation-to-nation dialogue and relationship, we aren’t able to achieve this most vital of goals. Yes, we have a long way to go, but let’s not forget that we’ve also come a long way already.  We must show Canada that we are partners. This past summer, The Tragically Hip showed a whole nation how we can come together in a powerful and positive way.  I heard Gord Downie that night in Kingston.  And with your honouring him today, I know you heard him, too. Indeed, 12 million Canadians heard him that night.  Gord, in simple and elegant words, used that moment to advocate and advance by many years the reconciliation dialogue in our country. Gord embodies all Canadians’ desire for reconciliation. Just as your honouring him today is an act of reconciliation.  The same way the young Cree Nishiyuu walker, David Kawapit, summoned his friends to take a leap of faith with him in a long walk of reconciliation, it is these individual acts that will help get our country where it needs and deserves to be. I recently heard my friend Joseph Boyden speak to reconciliation and why it is so necessary. He asked Canadians to understand the damage residential schools caused to Indigenous Peoples by comparing it to a great tsunami in slow motion advancing over the course of 140 years, destroying homes, splintering families, drowning children. This tsunami in slow motion left no home untouched.  But the tsunami has reached its high water mark and it now recedes. And the artists are the ones asked to be the beachcombers wandering the shoreline, sifting through the debris and beginning to take the pieces they find to build something new in the wake of the destruction. What they re-build won’t be the same as what it was before.  But it can be just as strong and as beautiful if we all come together to create it. It’s up to all of us to rebuild a new relationship.   All Canadians: teachers and students and construction workers and lawyers and police officers and parents.  And especially those of us gathered in this room. All of us, including the Chiefs in this room, need to challenge ourselves on our approach to governance.  We need to constantly be ensuring that all voices in the community are heard, and served by their leadership.  We can’t forget what we are all here to do.  To serve our communities. Decades ago now, the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples described many of the concerns I hear today from? Indigenous youth.  The commission told us how youth are wary of government.  Federal government certainly, but also Indigenous government.  That their concerns are not taken seriously, that their voices are not heard. The advice of the Royal Commission was right then, and it's right today - that's why we all should support a vision of governance in communities that work for, respond to, and is inclusive of Indigenous youth.  This is something we can and must do together. In the spirit of honouring our youth as well who begin the journey and don’t ever quit, let’s agree that we move forward to build our visions of our country that will propel us into the next centuries. I have seen firsthand the struggles of so many of our northern and remote communities, and every opportunity has cemented my resolve and deepened my understanding of reconciliation.   It made me see very clearly what reconciliation means. It means that if you are a child living on reserve, you should be able to turn on the tap and have clean water come out.   Water that you can drink, and bathe in, without fear. It means that if you are a parent, when you say goodnight to your child you know that your child will be alive and well the next morning when you awake. It means that if you are an Indigenous woman, you should not fear violence perpetrated against you when you walk down the street. These are just a few examples of things most Canadians take for granted.  Things I know that everyone gathered here wants for their communities.  My government is acting on these issues. Another fundamental issue is education.   Simply put, we need to do a better job of improving education and educational outcomes for Indigenous students, the fastest-growing demographic in schools across the country. Education both in the classroom, and out of it.  First Nations-led, First Nations- governed, culturally appropriate and sensitive education takes many forms, and is found in many different settings: in the classroom, in the home, and on the land. I believe that reconciliation will have firmly taken root in this country when the rest of Canada can look at the schools of First Nations communities as the shining light for a full and well-rounded education in all its many forms.   When First Nations- governed schools are the envy of others. Indigenous control of Indigenous education within a new nation-to-nation relationship, is a means to an end in ensuring culturally appropriate and quality education for Indigenous students.  The desire is there to make this a reality.  And so is the energy, and the willpower.  Let’s all agree tonight to work together on a nation-to-nation level to make this an achievable goal, moving forward. To nuture a nation-to-nation relationship, there has to be trust.  Mutual trust. I refuse to engage in or to ever use policies that aim to ignore, and then belittle, then attack, and finally blame the recipients of that bad policy. If we are to move forward in a nation-to-nation relationship, we have to try new things.   To take risks, even.   Some of what we try will work, some of it won’t.   Some of it will work for some nations, but not others.  But we can’t be afraid to try.   Part of rebuilding trust includes being willing to try, together. Reconciliation does not mean that we, or even all members within this proud assembly, will agree on everything. I know that there are people in this room who deeply disagree with our position to move ahead with the Kinder Morgan pipeline.  I know there are people here who agree with it.  I also know that there are people who deeply disagree with our position not to move forward with the Northern Gateway pipeline, just as there are those who agree with it. The test of our relationship is not whether we’ll always agree.  The test of our relationship is whether we can still move forward, together. Working together also means sharing what we know and learning from each other.   Whether that’s traditional knowledge or statistical data, if we are to collectively work on helping communities heal and succeed, this is vital.  All of us need hard data in order to make decisions both small and large. Those of us gathered in this room have the historic opportunity to define, together, what this relationship based on recognition will look like for generations to come.  Let’s not allow others to define our relationship for us or squander this extraordinary opportunity out of fear, mistrust or doubt. Let’s never give others the chance to think that we can’t make this work, or don’t care to. Instead, let’s look at the road ahead and take each step together with resolve.   We’re in the early days of this journey.  I know that we will disagree at times – on which path to take, or at what pace.   Some of us might want to push on, others will need to rest.  The important thing is that we keep moving forward, and that we keep moving forward together. Because our reward at the end is not a destination.   It’s a new and stronger and better Canada. I did not take lightly what I said to each minister when I asked them to be in my Cabinet: no relationship is more important to me and to Canada than the one with Indigenous Peoples. It is time for a renewed, nation-to-nation relationship with Indigenous Peoples, one that is based on recognition of rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership. We are truly on a Journey of the Nishiyuu, a Journey of the People. On our journey we need to speak openly and honestly – bluntly, if we have to –just as we need to listen to the wisdom of our own elders. And we must never forget the passion and energy of our youth. All of them are watching us. All of Canada is listening to us. Let’s do right – in memory of those who have come before us, and in sacred respect for generations to follow.    Miigwetch.  Kinanaskomitin. Mashi cho.  Gilakas'la.  Tshinashkumitinau.  Thank you.  Merci.  Good afternoon everyone.  Thank you for taking the time to join us today. Just over a year ago, Canadians elected a new government.  Their marching orders for us were clear: build an economy that works for me and my family, and protect the environment so we can leave a better, cleaner country to our kids. Voters rejected the old thinking that what is good for the economy is bad for the environment.  They embraced the idea that we need strong environmental policies if we expect to develop our natural resources and get them to international markets. Canadians know that strong action on the environment is good for the economy.  It makes us more competitive, by fostering innovation and reducing pollution.  Canadians value clean air and water, beautiful coasts and wilderness, and refuse to accept that they must be compromised in order to create growth. We agree. Since last November, we have worked hard to put in place a policy that gives life to these values.  A new policy that we believe will create good middle class jobs, and protect the environment for our kids and grandkids. We approved natural resource projects that meet the highest standards of environmental protection. We created a policy to put a price on pollution, and an Ocean Protection Plan to preserve our coasts. And we just announced our intention to phase out coal-powered electricity in Canada by 2030, all while expanding clean power sources.  This phase out will prevent more than 1,000 premature deaths and save taxpayers billions of dollars in health costs. We are doing all of this because we know the world is changing, and Canada must change with it.  Climate change is real.  It is here.  And it cannot be wished or voted away. Canadians know this, and they know we need to transition to a clean energy economy.  We owe it to ourselves to make our economy more competitive, and to our kids to leave them a cleaner environment. But we also know that this transition will take investment, and it won’t happen in a day.  We need to create good jobs and strong growth to pay for it. Canada is a country rich in energy of all kinds.  Conventional and renewable.  The energy of today and tomorrow.  That is a unique and tremendously positive place to be in the world. I have said many times that there isn’t a country in the world that would find billions of barrels of oil and leave it in the ground while there is a market for it. But it isn’t enough to just use that resource for our short-term interest. Our challenge is to use today’s wealth to create tomorrow’s opportunity.  Ultimately, this is about leaving a better country for our kids than the one we inherited from our parents. Today, we are taking a strong step in that direction. We are here to announce the Government of Canada’s decisions on major energy projects, and the fulfillment of some very significant commitments we made to Canadians during last fall’s election campaign. We said that major pipelines could only get built if we had a price on carbon, and strong environmental protections in place.  We said that Indigenous peoples must be respected, and be a part of the process.   We also said that we would only approve projects that could be built and run safely. And that’s how we’ve come to our decisions today. First, the Government of Canada has approved the Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain Expansion Project. This pipeline will twin a line that has been in operation since 1953, which extends from Edmonton, Alberta, to Burnaby, British Columbia.  The project will effectively triple our capacity to get Canadian energy resources to international markets beyond the Unites States. It will create 15,000 new, middle class jobs – the majority of them in the trades.  This major initiative will get hardworking Canadians back to work, put food on the table for middle class families, and grow and strengthen our communities. It will give much needed new hope to thousands of hard-working people in Alberta’s conventional energy sector, who have suffered a great deal over the past few years. Aside from the many and obvious economic benefits, we approved this project because it meets the strictest of environmental standards, and fits within our national climate plan. We will require that Kinder Morgan meet or exceed all 157 of the binding conditions set out by the National Energy Board.  These conditions address potential impacts on Indigenous communities, the protection of local wildlife, and the offset of greenhouse gas emissions during construction. And let me say this definitively: We could not have approved this project without the leadership of Premier Notley, and Alberta’s Climate Leadership Plan – a plan that commits to pricing carbon and capping oilsands emissions at 100 megatonnes per year. We want to be clear on this point, because it is important and sometimes not well understood.  Alberta’s climate plan is a vital contributor to our national strategy.  It has been rightly celebrated as a major step forward by industry and the environmental community. It caps emissions from oilsands over the mid-term, but allows for production to increase from present levels.  Today, Canada’s pipelines are operating at full capacity.  That means any significant new production must find another way to get to market.  Those modes of transport are less safe than pipelines. Indeed, we know that new, state of the art pipelines provide the safest route to get our resources to market.  This is not an argument.  It is a fact.  So from this perspective, creating new pipeline capacity is the most responsible decision we could make to ensure public safety and mitigate risk.    We also could not approve this project without the best in class marine safety standards and capability we are putting in place through the Government of Canada’s new Oceans Protection Plan.  The Trans Mountain expansion will increase vessel traffic in the Burrard Inlet by 13% overall, and the Oceans Protection Plan will make sure that any risk coming from increased vessel traffic in Burrard Inlet is properly mitigated. We understand — and share — the deep and abiding sense of responsibility British Columbians feel for our spectacular west coast.  Indeed, it is a personal issue for me.  I spent much of my childhood on the coast and on the water with my grandparents.  I worked and lived in BC for years as a teacher. Now, I have heard and listened very carefully to the many diverse perspectives that exist in BC on this project.  Indeed, one of its most articulate and substantive critics is a caucus colleague, Terry Beech. Others will be opposed to this project for their own reasons.  We respect that, and we respect their right to hold and voice their beliefs. But to them — and to all Canadians — I want to say this: if I thought this project was unsafe for the BC coast, I would reject it.  This is a decision based on rigorous debate, on science and on evidence.  We have not been and will not be swayed by political arguments -- be they local, regional or national. We have made this decision because we are convinced it is safe for BC, and it is the right one for Canada.  It is a major win for Canadian workers, Canadian families, and the Canadian economy. Second, we have also approved the Line 3 Replacement Project. This project replaces over 1,000km of an existing pipeline from Hardisty, Alberta, to Gretna, Manitoba.  It will create 7,000 new, good jobs for tradespeople.  It will be required to meet or exceed 37 binding conditions from the National Energy Board. Fundamentally, this is a safety issue. On Line 3, the reality is this: This aging pipeline is in dire need of replacement.  Once completed, this new infrastructure will increase efficiency, improve workplace and environmental safety, and ensure that the latest technology is in place to prevent leaks. Trans Mountain’s unique strategic value is it will give traditional Canadian energy resources access to international markets beyond the United States.  Line 3 will renew aging infrastructure to ensure we can continue to supply resources to our most important and valued trading partner. Taken together, these projects will create thousands of good, middle class jobs for Canadians.  They’ll also generate billions of dollars in government revenue at all levels. That’s money that can be invested in our hospitals, roads, and clean energy initiatives. These projects have received government approval because they meet our standards on the environment.  But not all pipelines meet these strict criteria. Today, we are also announcing that the Government of Canada has directed the National Energy Board to dismiss the application for the Northern Gateway Pipelines Project. It has become clear that this project is not in the best interests of the local affected communities, including Indigenous peoples. The Great Bear Rainforest is no place for a pipeline, and the Douglas Channel is no place for oil tanker traffic. Even before we formed government, we were clear about our intentions to protect the Great Bear Rainforest and Sea.  This unique and beautiful ecosystem thrives with diverse wildlife, and supplies an abundant and sustainable economy to the tens of thousands of people who depend on its health.  It is a jewel of Canada’s west coast. Finally, I am also pleased to announce that we will keep our commitment to implement a moratorium on crude oil tanker shipping on British Columbia’s north coast. After consulting at length with people who live and work there – including Indigenous partners – we’ve heard firsthand how detrimental crude oil tanker traffic is to this region. Very shortly, we’ll introduce legislation to make this tanker moratorium the law. As a grandson of BC, I strongly believe that this moratorium – coupled with the rejection of the Northern Gateway Pipeline – is the right call for the people of this province, and for Canada. The four decisions we’ve announced today were all made after rigorous consultation and examination of the evidence. We believe they will help provide the growth and resources we need to spur Canada’s clean energy transition.  We believe they prove that responsible resource development can go hand in hand with strong environmental protection. We believe they are safe, responsible and in the interest of all Canadians. Most importantly, we believe they will help achieve the vital mission Canadians sent us here to achieve: to make progress.  To leave a cleaner, more prosperous country to our kids than the one we inherited from our parents. These Decisions reflect a true team effort, and we are very much looking forward to taking your questions. Hello, Everyone. It is a real pleasure for me to be with you today—as Prime Minister of Canada, but especially as a proud Francophone.   I would like to thank the President of the Republic of Madagascar and the Malagasy people for their warm welcome.  I would also like to mention that the President studied at a Canadian university, the Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières.  So his background is an indication of the wide variety of ties that are being formed between the countries and citizens of the Francophone world. I would also like to thank my good friend, the Secretary General and former Governor General of Canada, Michaëlle Jean, for her great work at the head of the International Organisation of La Francophonie.  Michaëlle, your leadership is a source of pride for all Canadians. The IOF is an organization that is making an important contribution in a constantly changing world, through its actions and its shared values. For Canadians, membership in La Francophonie is based on a common language, history and culture that unite us from one end of our vast nation to the other.  And it is also a window into a rich and diverse world, with plenty of differences, but united in its values and aspirations.   And so, although many challenges remain, there are also many opportunities. The countries of Africa play a central role in La Francophonie. As you know, Africa is the continent with the youngest population in the world.  This represents boundless potential for its countries, but for also for Canada, which is re-engaging with Africa to be a reliable long-term partner.    As a father and as the minister responsible for Youth, I take every opportunity to remind people that our youth are not the leaders of tomorrow, they are already the leaders of today!Our challenge is to give them a strong voice, to listen to them and to incorporate their viewpoints in our decisions.  Our challenge is also to give them and subsequent generations a clean and healthy environment by providing the means to actively combat pollution and climate change.  One way to do this is by implementing the Paris Agreement. Young people today are citizens of the world—they want to discover, learn, broaden their horizons.  They are open-minded and have a thirst for freedom and equality that no other generation before them has matched.   So let’s let them contribute!All of us must also ensure that women and girls are given their rightful place.   I am a feminist.  And I am extremely proud of that. Women and girls have a key role to play in politics, in business, in conflict resolution and in peacekeeping.  They must fully participate in society.  And it is not just up to women to speak out, but we men need to as well.  It is our fight, too. Because when women and girls succeed, we all reap the benefits. But for women to succeed, we must first ensure that their human rights are respected.  The right to live without violence, the right to free choice in matters of their sexual and reproductive health, the right to equality, and the right to participate fully and completely in society. And yet, these rights are still violated far too often.  Women and girls are victims of physical and sexual violence.  They are married off, often at a young age, without their consent.  They cannot freely and safely access abortion.  They are subjected to genital mutilation.   Enough! There is no excuse for such practices, for such violations of their human rights.  All of us together, women and men, have the duty to create the conditions that women and girls need to reach their full potential. Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities are suffering in too many countries, including in some member countries of La Francophonie here today.  We owe them the same respect, the same rights and the same dignity as we give all other members of our society. We are faced with other challenges, too, the foremost being the threat of radicalization and violent extremism.   We know now that isolated or marginalized individuals are more likely to become radicalized or fall into the grips of extremist groups.  Conversely, people who feel included, valued and fully appreciated have a much greater chance of making a positive contribution to society.   Therefore, to prevent radicalization, we must implement prevention strategies.  This includes creating a society where diversity is celebrated and where we maintain an ongoing dialogue with members of minority communities. And because too often our young people are more vulnerable to radicalization, we must do more for them, by offering all young people the vocational training they need so they can enter the job market and help their society thrive. We often have discussions regarding issues of identity.  Canadian identity is built upon the values of diversity, inclusion and democracy.  These values are at the very core of our success.  They contribute to strengthening and growing our middle class. We are a multicultural country with two official languages, and we are as proud of our shared values as we are of our differences.  Our languages and cultures are a window to the world for our children and those who choose to make Canada home. I would like to share a few words now, in English, with my Anglophone counterparts, who have embraced the bilingual nature of our country. Canada’s character as a bilingual country is part of its very fabric.  It teaches us every day to be stronger, more open.  And Canada’s participation in La Francophonie provides us with a unique platform to promote our values of openness and diversity as well as our agenda of empowerment for all.   Today, we, the Francophones of Canada, are a vital part of this open and plural society.  And it is why we are ready to play a leading role within the international Francophone community. We have the proof right before us, as Canadians are represented at this Summit not only by the federal government, but also by the governments of Quebec and New-Brunswick.  These governments have been long active within the Canadian and international Francophonie, and they have provided outstanding leadership. The Government of Ontario is now seeking to join the IOF as an observer, which we are all very proud of.  Ontario, home to some 600,000 Francophones and millions of francophiles, will certainly make a major contribution to the organization.  Canada stands firm behind Ontario’s candidacy and urges all IOF members to do the same. As a Quebecer, I would also like to applaud the ongoing efforts of the Quebec government to protect and promote the French language.  It has gone beyond defending our beautiful language.  Not only has the Quebec government ensured the bilingual nature of Canada, but it has also been crucial to the vitality and strength of our language at home and abroad. We are here for our Francophone communities in Canada and here for Francophones and francophiles across the globe. We are determined to strengthen the ties that we already have.  We are committed to forging new bonds with countries that share our vision of a better, more just world. My friends, we need to bring about the positive change we want to see.  It is our role to share our values with the other Francophone and francophile societies. The 21st century belongs to us if, together, we are prepared to take on the challenges that we face. The opportunities open to us are unprecedented; it is up to us to grasp them. Member countries have a crucial role to play in the legacy that we will leave our children and grandchildren. By offering a helping hand now, we can meet their expectations and their eagerness:   for a better world that we can build on together in the future.   Thank you. Hello everyone! It’s great to be back in Vancouver. Thanks, Marc, for your hard work, for the warm welcome, and for everything you do as Minister of Transport. It’s an honour to be here today on the traditional territory of the Coast Salish people, home of the Musqueam, Squamish and Tsleil-Waututh. As many of you know, Transport Canada has been working hard with Indigenous communities across the country lately.  So thank you, Marc – to you and your entire team. And I’d also like to shout out Vancouver Centre’s fantastic and much-beloved Member of Parliament, Dr.  Hedy Fry.  She continues to do great work on behalf of the people of BC in Ottawa.  Thanks for being here, Hedy. And thanks to our entire BC team. Thank you, everyone, for being here.  This is a really exciting day for Canadians from coast to coast to coast, and I’m glad you could join us. Let me start by saying that it’s great to be here at HMCS Discovery, and it’s a real pleasure to be back in beautiful British Columbia. This amazing province is, in many ways, home to me.  It has been my whole life –as a kid, as a young adult, and now, as a father and husband.  And I’ve got some particularly cherished memories to show for it. I remember, as a kid, being brought by my grandmother to sailing lessons at Jericho Beach– great memories set against bright blue water and gorgeous views of the North Shore. And I also remember exploring Cypress Creek with my younger brothers, Sacha and Michel, and my Grandpa Jimmy. As a young man, I taught French and math at schools across Vancouver, including West Point Grey and Sir Winston Churchill. And even now, as a father, husband, and leader, I always find myself coming back to the coast. I kicked off the federal election campaign marching in Vancouver Pride. I hiked the Grouse Grind last summer. And a few months back, I spent some quality time with my family, exploring Tofino and surfing at Chesterman Beach. Now, you may be wondering: Why am I reminding you of all this? Why am I sharing these memories with you?Well, it’s because I want you to know why I cherish this place.  I want you to know why it’s important to me.  And I want you to know that, in my capacity as Prime Minister, I will do my best to ensure that my kids – and all of your kids – get to enjoy the West Coast just as I have, just as we all have, for many years to come. The ongoing incident at Bella Bella is unacceptable.  I know this.  You know this.  Canadians know this.  It’s time for a change. As a community, we need to protect our magnificent oceans – and re-opening the Kitsilano Coast Guard base this summer was an important first step. But indeed, that was only a down-payment on our larger plan.  We must make sure we protect all of our coastlines, not just the one we’re on right now. As we know, Canada is blessed with some of the most spectacular coastlines in the world.  They give Canadians and visitors alike places to live, work, and play. Our coasts are the traditional territory of Indigenous communities; they are habitats for rich biodiversity and precious ecosystems; and they offer unparalleled economic, recreational, and tourism opportunities. And it’s up to all of us to keep it that way. That is why, today, I am very pleased to announce the Government of Canada’s Oceans Protection Plan. This robust, national plan will protect our oceans and coastlines from the damage that comes from shipping and pollution. These measures are progressive and proactive, and will ensure the health of our oceans for generations to come. With this new plan, Canada will have one of the best marine safety and emergency preparation systems in the world. These strong measures are urgently needed and long overdue.  This represents the most significant investment ever made to protect our oceans and coastlines. So let me tell you about just a few of the measures outlined in our plan. We’re going to strengthen the Canadian Coast Guard and boost their presence to ensure our waters are better protected 24/7. We’re going to get tough on businesses and industries that pollute along our coasts. We’re going to preserve and restore our marine ecosystems, by introducing a new fund for coastal habitat restoration.  In that same vein, we will introduce new legislation to increase vessel owner responsibility and liability for abandoned and wrecked vessels.  We’re going to re-open the Maritime Rescue Sub-Centre in St.  John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador. We’re going to collect and share better information on marine tanker and vessel traffic with coastal communities, so we can work together to prevent spills. And, most important, we invite Indigenous communities to partner with us to effectively co-manage our oceans.  This includes launching Indigenous Community Response Teams here in BC to help respond to coastal emergencies, if and when they arise. All this is in addition to many other important measures that will protect our coastlines, and the people who call them home. This ambitious, forward-thinking plan is all about protecting the environment, ensuring efficient transportation, maintaining public safety, and yes, creating jobs. Our Oceans Protection Plan will result in a truly world class system for marine protection and emergency preparedness – one that will meet or surpass the world-leading marine safety practices of Alaska and Norway. And as a grandson of BC, I’m thrilled at what this means for folks out here. You know, as a government, everything we do, and every action we take, is done with one goal in mind: We want to leave our kids and grandkids with a better place to live – whether we’re creating good, well-paying jobs for the middle class; ensuring our communities are safe and protected; or taking the necessary action to safeguard our environment. And by working together with our partners along the coasts and across the country, I know we can preserve our coastlines for generations to come. Thank you very much for being here today.  Thank you, Mr.  Speaker. I have had many opportunities over the past year – over the past number of years, really – to reflect on Canada’s success. And every time we have done something well, whether it was decades ago with Medicare and CPP, or more recently getting our national debt under control in the 1990s, taking steps to ensure the stability of our banking system, or responding to a global refugee crisis, our success has been rooted in two things. First, that when we see a problem, we don’t walk away from it, or deny that it exists.  Instead, we lean in.  We work hard – and we work together – to solve the problems that come our way. And second, when we say we’re going to do something, we follow through.  We live up to our commitments.  The world expects that of us.  So do the markets.  And so do our fellow Canadians. It is in that very Canadian spirit of solving problems and keeping promises that I address the House today, and share the government’s plan for pricing carbon pollution. After decades of inaction, after years of missed opportunities, we will finally take real and concrete measures to build a clean economy, create more opportunities for Canadians, and make our world better for our children and grandchildren. Mr.  Speaker, we will not walk away from science, and we will not deny the unavoidable. With the plan put forward by the government, all Canadian jurisdictions will have put a price on carbon pollution by 2018. To do that, the government will set a floor price for carbon pollution. The price will be set at a level that will help Canada reach its targets for greenhouse gas emissions, while providing businesses with greater stability and improved predictability. Provinces and territories will have a choice in how they implement this pricing.  They can put a direct price on carbon pollution, or they can adopt a cap-and-trade system, with the expectation that it be stringent enough to meet or exceed the federal benchmark. The government proposes that the price on carbon pollution should start at a minimum of $10 per tonne in 2018, rising by $10 each year to $50 per tonne in 2022. Provinces and territories that choose cap-and-trade systems will need to decrease emissions in line to both Canada’s target and to the reductions expected in jurisdictions that choose a price-based system. If neither price nor cap and trade is in place by 2018, the Government of Canada will implement a price in that jurisdiction. Whatever approach is chosen, this policy will be revenue neutral for the federal government.  All revenues generated under this system will stay in the province or territory where they are generated. Because pollution crosses borders, all provinces must do their part. And to make sure that this plan continues to meet Canada’s targets, it will be reviewed at the end of five years, in 2022. As we are talking today, the Minister of the Environment and Climate Change is discussing the details of this plan with our provincial and territorial partners. Over the next two months, the government will work closely with the provinces, territories and Aboriginal organizations to finalize this plan. These discussions are essential, because we know that no plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions can succeed without the help of our provincial and territorial partners, who have already shown great leadership in tackling climate change. I am especially looking forward to meeting with provincial premiers and Aboriginal leaders on December 8 and 9 to finalize the details of this pan-Canada plan to fight climate change. This framework will include not only the plan for pricing carbon pollution, but will also pave the way forward to better support innovation and jobs in the clean energy sector, manage the effects of climate change, and improve our capacity for adaptation and climate resilience. I’d like to take this opportunity again to congratulate the provinces who have led on this file while the previous federal government abdicated its responsibility to all Canadians. That era is over. Of course, a plan is only as good as the principles on which it is based.  And so I would like to take a few minutes, Mr.  Speaker, to talk about why the government has decided to act now to put pricing on carbon pollution. There are many reasons to act now, and I am certain that the Members opposite are as familiar with those reasons as the government is, even if their track record suggests otherwise. But today I would like to identify three of the biggest reasons why pricing carbon pollution is right for Canada, and for Canadians. First, setting a price for carbon pollution will give us a significant advantage while we build a clean-growth economy. A reasonable and predictable price for carbon pollution will encourage innovation because businesses will have to find new ways to reduce their emissions and pollute less. It will also make our businesses more competitive. The global economy is becoming increasingly clean, and Canada cannot afford to be left behind. Around the world, the markets are changing.  They are moving away from products and services that create carbon pollution and turning to cleaner and more sustainable options. By giving Canadian businesses the incentives they need to make this change, we are opening the door to new opportunities. And you do not need to take my word for it, Mr.  Speaker.  Last summer, business leaders from across the country spoke out in favour of carbon pricing. Retail leaders like Canadian Tire, Loblaws, IKEA and Air Canada. Energy producers like Enbridge, Shell and Suncor. Natural resource companies like Barrick Gold, Resolute Forest Products and Teck Resources. And financial institutions like BMO, Desjardins, Royal Bank, Scotiabank and TD. These businesses support carbon pricing because they know that – when it is done well – it is the most effective way to reduce emissions while continuing to grow the economy. They know that a clean environment and a strong economy go hand in hand. They are anxious to take advantage of the opportunities inherent in a clean-growth economy. And they, like the government, recognize that if we do not act now, the Canadian economy will suffer. The second reason to move ahead with pricing carbon pollution is the benefit it will deliver to Canadians – especially for the middle class and those working hard to join it. As the business leaders I just mentioned put it, “… carbon pricing uses the market to drive clean investment decisions.  It encourages innovation. ”That innovation brings with it new and exciting job prospects for Canadian workers. As one example, last year, nearly a third of a trillion dollars was invested globally in renewable power – almost 50% more than was invested in power from fossil fuels.  That’s a trend that will only accelerate, Mr.  Speaker. Simply put, there are billions of dollars, and hundreds of thousands of good, well-paying jobs on the table for the countries that get this right.  Engineering, design and programming jobs.  Manufacturing jobs – whether it’s solar panels or electric vehicles.  Jobs researching and processing biofuels.  Among many, many examples. If we do not take full advantage of these opportunities now before us, we are doing Canadians a tremendous disservice. Finally, I think that all Canadians will understand the third reason why we must move forward with pricing carbon pollution. It has been proven that it is a good way to prevent heavy polluters from emitting greenhouse gases that fuel climate change and threaten the entire planet. Carbon pricing is an effective way to reduce the pollution that threatens air quality and the quality of the oceans’ water. Just last week, the World Health Organization published a report that said that 9 out of 10 people live in places with poor air quality.  The consequences for human health are tremendous and devastating: each year, 3 million deaths are linked to air pollution. We must – and we will – do better. We’ve seen what can happen when governments take a stand for cleaner air.  In 2005, in Toronto, there were 53 smog days.  A decade later, thanks in large part to the phase-out of coal-fired generating stations, there were zero smog days. This is a very big deal if your child has asthma, and can’t go outside to play with her friends during her summer vacation.  Or if you have grandparents who have to miss out on family events because they find it difficult to breathe the air in their own backyard. And if you live in Canada’s north, or in our coastal communities, or, really, Mr.  Speaker, in any community that is subject to extreme weather conditions and the resulting floods, droughts, and wildfires, then the effects of climate change itself cannot be denied. There is no hiding from climate change.  It is real, and it is everywhere. We cannot undo the last 10 years of inaction.  What we can do is make a real and honest effort – today and every day – to protect the health of our environment, and with it, the health of all Canadians. The Governor of the Bank of England – one of Canada’s best exports, by the way – has spoken to this issue on many occasions.  And Mr.  Carney has an interesting term for it.  He calls the unwillingness to act “the tragedy of the horizon. ”What he means is that the truly catastrophic effects of climate change will be felt in the future.  Or as he puts it, “beyond the traditional horizons of most actors, imposing a cost on future generations that the current one has no direct incentive to fix. ”With great respect to Mr.  Carney – because I think when it comes to climate change, we are very much on the same page – I believe that current actors, such as the government, do have a direct incentive to fix things. And if I may speak from a personal point of view, Mr.  Speaker, I myself have three motivations.  Their names are Xavier, Ella-Grace and Hadrien. And I am not the only one who is concerned about the type of world that we will leave to the next generation and to generations after that. From community to community, I have talked to parents and grandparents, who shared with me their concerns for the future, and who have challenged the government – and their provincial and community leaders – to take action immediately to avoid tragic and devastating consequences. We hear their concerns, and we respect their voices.  And it is because we respect the desire of Canadians that we will move forward with carbon pollution pricing. Mr.  Speaker, as you know, the government is not obliged to seek the approval of Parliament prior to ratifying the Paris Agreement, nor do we need the House to demonstrate its support for the Vancouver Declaration. We have chosen to bring this issue before the House, however, because we think it is important that all parliamentarians – and through them, all Canadians – be given a chance to debate and vote on this crucial issue. I look forward to what I hope will be a spirited yet respectful debate on this important topic.  It is one that will shape the country we live in for generations to come. Thank you. Good afternoon. Mr.  President, fellow delegates, and friends.  It is an honour to be with you today. And it’s wonderful to be here in the great city of New York.  Once again this week, New Yorkers showed us how to be resilient and resolute in the face of violent extremism. On behalf of everybody in this room, let me say directly to the people of New York: you are a model to the world.  And we thank you. It is the responsibility of a leader to spend time with the people they were elected to serve. If you want the real stories, you have to go where people live.  Coffee shops and church basements, mosques and synagogues.  Farmer’s markets.  Public parks. It was in places like that that I got the best sense of what Canadians were thinking, and how they were doing.  And through the politeness—because we Canadians are always polite, even when we’re complaining—I learnt some things. I talked with people my age who were trying to be hopeful about their future, but found it tough to make ends meet, even when they were working full time. I heard from young Canadians who were frustrated.  Who told me that they couldn’t get a job because they don’t have work experience, and they couldn’t get work experience because they don’t have a job. I heard from women and girls who still face inequality in the workplace and violence just because they are women, even in a progressive country like Canada. I met parents working hard to give their children every chance to succeed, but were afraid that their efforts won’t be enough. And I had the opportunity to share meals with retired seniors who worked hard their whole lives and are now forced to rely on food banks. I’ve had too many distressing conversations with Canadians over the past few years.  But they made something very clear to me. Canadians still believe in progress.  Or at least, that progress is possible. But that optimism is mixed with a lot of concern. Obviously, Canadians are not alone in feeling that way.  Those feelings are ubiquitous.  That anxiety is a reality. When leaders are faced with citizens’ anxiety, we have a choice to make. Do we exploit that anxiety or do we allay it?Exploiting it is easy.  But in order to allay it, we need to be prepared to answer some very direct questions. What will create the good, well-paying jobs that people want, and need, and deserve?What will strengthen and grow the middle class, and help those working hard to join it?What will build an economy that works for everyone?What will help to make the world a safer, more peaceful place?To allay people’s anxiety, we need to create economic growth that is broadly shared, because a fair and successful world is a peaceful world. We need to focus on what brings us together, not what divides us. For Canada, that means re-engaging in global affairs through institutions like the United Nations.  It doesn’t serve our interests—or the world’s—to pretend we’re not deeply affected by what happens beyond our borders. Earlier this year, we helped negotiate the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.  As part of our commitment to implementing that agreement, we announced that Canada would invest $2. 65 billion over five years to fund clean, low-carbon growth in developing countries. In order to help promote peace and security in areas affected by instability, we reaffirmed our support for NATO and committed ourselves to expanding Canada’s role in United Nations peacekeeping operations. And we hosted the Fifth Global Fund Replenishment Conference, where we increased our contribution by 20% by giving more than $800 million to the Global Fund.  And we also encouraged our partners to increase their contributions, making it possible to raise $13 billion in support of ending AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria by 2030. We’ve done all this—and will do much more—because we believe we should confront anxiety with a clear plan to deal with its root causes. And we believe we should bring people together around shared purposes like the UN Sustainable Development Goals. Because what is the alternative?To exploit anxiety?To turn it into fear and blame?To reject others because they look, or speak, or pray differently than we do?You see, in Canada we got a very important thing right.  Not perfect, but right. In Canada, we see diversity as a source of strength, not weakness.  Our country is strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them. And make no mistake: we have had many failures, from the internment of Ukrainian, Japanese and Italian Canadians during the World Wars; to our turning away boats of Jewish and Punjabi refugees; to the shamefully continuing marginalization of Indigenous Peoples. What matters is that we learn from our mistakes, and recommit ourselves to doing better. To that end, in recent months, Canadians have opened their arms and their hearts to families fleeing the ongoing conflict in Syria.  And from the moment they arrived, those 31,000 refugees were welcomed—not as burdens, but as neighbours and friends.  As new Canadians. That effort brought Canadians together.  In an almost unprecedented fashion, the government worked with the business community, engaged citizens and civil society to help the newcomers adapt to their new country. But our efforts will not truly be successful until those refugees have become established, full-fledged members of the Canadian middle class. And I want you to know that this objective is within our grasp—not because of what we have done, but because of what they are themselves. You see, refugees are people with the same hopes and dreams as our own citizens. But while our people have felt anxiety, Syrians faced catastrophe. Do you want to know where Syria’s middle class is?They’re living in refugee camps in Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan. They’re moving across Europe, looking for a place to set down roots, get their kids back in school, find steady work, and be productive citizens. Refugee camps are teeming with Syria’s middle class.  Doctors and lawyers.  Teachers and entrepreneurs.  They’re well educated.  They work hard.  They care about their families.  They want a better life—a safer and more secure future for their kids—as we all do. So when I say that I hope that the Syrian refugees we welcomed will soon be able to join our middle class, I am confident that we can make that happen. And we’ll do it by offering to them the same things we offer to all our citizens—a real and fair chance at success. We’re going to do all we can to build a strong middle class in Canada. We’re going to invest in education, because it gives the next generation the tools they need to contribute to the world economy and succeed. We’re going to invest in infrastructure because it creates good, well-paying jobs for the middle class and helps to make our communities better places to live, work and invest. We’re determined to build an economy that works for everyone—not just the wealthiest 1%—so that every person benefits from economic growth. And we are going to refuse to give in to the pressure of trading our cherished values for easy votes.  The world expects better from us, and we expect better from ourselves. In the end, my friends, there is a choice to be made.  Strong, diverse, resilient countries like Canada didn’t happen by accident, and they won’t continue without effort. Every single day, we need to choose hope over fear, and diversity over division. Fear has never fed a family nor created a single job. And those who exploit it will never solve the problems that have created such anxiety. Our citizens, the nearly 7. 5 billion people we collectively serve, are better than the cynics and pessimists think they are. They want their problems solved not exploited. Listen, Canada is a modest country.  We know we can’t solve these problems alone. We know we need to do this all together. We know it will be hard work. But we’re Canadian.  And we’re here to help.  Thank you Chrystia, for that kind introduction, and thank you also for achieving important progress for Canadian canola farmers, including your father on his farm in Peace River, Alberta.   The work that you've done over these past few days, indeed, over these past many months, has been extraordinary on so many files in helping Canadians, in helping build relationships around the world. Thank you, Chrystia, for all you’ve done. It's wonderful to be here tonight.   It's wonderful to see so many friends in the room tonight.   People I didn't expect to see here who’ve come from Canada; people I've met, Chinese investors present in Canada who've gathered here tonight.   This is a wonderful celebration of a tremendous friendship that stretches back through the decades, but mostly will stretch forward decades and decades into the future. I want to start by thanking the Canada China Business Council, its directors, benefactors, staff, and volunteers, for putting on this tremendous event.   I'd also like to acknowledge three of my many friends who are here with us tonight. The first is my old friend Raymond Chan, who in 2004 became Canada's first Chinese Canadian cabinet minister.   Thank you for being here tonight, Raymond. The next is Geng Tan, who's also here with us tonight and a current Member of Parliament.   Geng was born in Hunan and just last fall was elected as Canada's very first Member of Parliament from mainland China. We also have Shaun Chen here, a strong, young member of our Chinese Canadian caucus.   And although Arnold Chan couldn't be with us here tonight, I know he wishes he could.   Indeed, our Parliament is lucky to have Chinese-Canadians in all political parties, representing communities across Canada in the House of Commons. Now, Sophie, my wife, my daughter Ella-Grace and I have been in China for a little more than two days, but already we've been deeply touched by the incredible hospitality shown to us, and indeed, to our entire Canadian delegation.   So thank you, once again, for your warm and generous welcome.   It means a tremendous amount to us, and we're honoured to be your guests today, including the guests of His Excellency Yang Xiong, the Mayor of Shanghai.   Thank you all for your welcome. This visit is taking place at a special time, a special time in the history of Canada as well as in the history of China.  In fact, a crucial time in the history of our planet.  And with that in mind, I want to share with you the reasons for this visit and what I hope to accomplish while we are here. First and foremost, this visit is about renewing and deepening the relationship between the people of Canada and the people of China.   As you know, it's a relationship that historically has been close and warm, but more recently has perhaps been a little more distant or unfocused.   So I want to be as clear as I possibly can be on this point: China matters to Canada. China's growth, its environmental progress, its economic success, the role it plays in the world, and the progress it makes on governance and the rule of law, all of these matter to Canadians and they matter to me. I see three reasons why a stronger relationship between Canada and China benefits both countries.   The first has to do with strengthening and growing the middle class.   In Canada, we know that the heart of our economy rests with our middle class and all those working hard to join it. These are the people who get up early every day, take their children to school, use public transit to get to work, and work hard to make ends meet for their family.  They don’t ask for much.  In fact, when you talk to them – and I have spent a lot of time with thousands of Canadians in communities across the country – you’ll see that all they want in return for their hard work is a real chance to succeed.  In return, they simply ask for an opportunity to give their children a better world than the one they inherited from their own parents. That same spirit, that same drive to do a little better and to be a little better exists everywhere in China as well.   And that's why it's so important to be very clear with people about what a stronger relationship means for our respective economies. For Canadians it means that our businesses will have greater access to the large and rapidly growing Chinese and Asian economies.   That means a bigger market for quality Canadian food, like beef and pork, of course, but also for lobster and cherries.   It means more customers for Canadian financial services companies and more clients for design and engineering firms. The rapid and wide-scale structural change now taking place in China's economy also means that trade and investment opportunities will continue to emerge and evolve.   Some of the clean technology now being developed in both countries was not on anyone's radar a generation ago, and we can't take advantage of tomorrow's opportunities if we don't work hard on building good relationships today because we know that when we do build strong and resilient relationships -- when we give Canadian businesses more opportunities to succeed -- they will succeed.   That means more better-paying jobs for Canadians, and when Canadian companies partner with Chinese companies, it means more and better-paying jobs here in China as well. And so when I say that a stronger relationship between our two countries will benefit both countries, I'm thinking very much of the ways in which we can work together as partners to create jobs and strengthen the middle class in our communities and in yours. Second, a stronger relationship between Ottawa and Beijing, one that strengthens and grows the middle class, will encourage economic growth as it opens doors and creates new opportunities for both Canadian and Chinese businesses to succeed.   A stronger relationship between Ottawa and Beijing leads to better opportunities between Montreal and Shanghai, Vancouver and Hong Kong, Waterloo and Hangzhou, and so forth.   And not just for the large multinational firms like Manulife and Huawei, but also for small and medium-size businesses like Nova Scotia's JusNova, which thanks to a local joint venture agreement, will be able to build a local manufacturing facility for wild blueberry products. Or David Bromley Engineering, based in B. C. , which will have a chance to deploy its innovative water treatment technology in Northern Alberta, thanks to private sector Chinese investors. And on the research front we have deals like the one signed with the Sichuan Bohong Group to establish a joint auto engineering research lab at the University of Windsor. Opportunities exist.  They are real and important for jobs.  Good, well-paying jobs in Canada and in China.  And not just in traditional industries like natural resources or agri-food, but also in new sectors like clean tech. The opportunities that exist are real and significant.   They don't just exist on paper, they are real jobs, as good, well-paying jobs in Canada and in China.  And not just in traditional industries, such as natural resources or agriculture, but also in newer sectors like clean tech. Now, I know that this room is filled with smart enterprising people who get things done.   But I also know that your work is easier when there is commitment at the highest level to building and nurturing strong, stable, long-term relationships between governments, and that's exactly what we're here to do. China's leadership plays a central role in driving global economic growth.   Any economic strategy that ignores China or that treats the valuable relationship as anything less than critically important is not just short-sighted, it's irresponsible. And as I have said, the benefits of a revitalized relationship go both ways.   Canada is an outstanding place to invest.   Canada is recognized as the best country in the G20 to do business.   We're home to the soundest banking system in the world and we have a workforce that is highly-educated and willing to work hard. That's why smart investors, like the ones helping to create opportunities and jobs through JusNova, David Bromley Engineering, and dozens upon dozens of other examples, are turning to Canada.   Because they know a good deal when they see one. And third, a stronger relationship will allow us to work together more effectively in a global context.   What we can accomplish by working together will always exceed what we can get by going it alone.   Think of the ways in which our cultural ties are deepened and strengthened by the experiences of young Chinese students who come to Canada to learn in our universities.   Or by the exchange of tourists.   Every year half a million Chinese tourists visit Canada, and it may surprise some of you to learn that similar numbers of Canadians come here every year.   And we're looking forward to seeing those numbers climb with our announcement that 2018 will be the year dedicated to Canada-China tourism.   Although, we're encouraging you all to get a head start, because next year is Canada's 150th birthday and in true Canadian fashion we're throwing open our doors and inviting the world to come celebrate with us. But, of course, tourism is just one example.   Another example, one that truly has the potential to affect the lives of every person on the planet, is climate change.   Climate change is a global challenge; one that demands a global response. As signatories to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, Canada and China have committed to both address the challenges that come with climate change and embrace the opportunities that it presents.   We have before us a chance to build a clean growth economy that will help to fight climate change while creating good, well-paying jobs for our citizens. Just as Canada will look to ways to lead the clean energy transition, we know that China will do the same.   And it is our hope that in doing so we will take advantage of this historic opportunity to work together, to invest in each other, to build in our shared knowledge, and to grow our economies in ways that are as clean as they are competitive. Finally, I think there are ways in which a stronger relationship makes it easier for our two countries to have regular, frank discussions on issues like good governance, human rights, and the rule of law.   Freedom of expression is a true Canadian value, one protected by our Charter of Rights and Freedoms.   You see, Canada has succeeded, culturally, politically, economically because of our diversity, not in spite of it. That message was central to the platform that got us elected and has remained at the heart of how we have governed, and it was a message that I carried into my meetings this week, including those with President Xi and Premier Li. I shared with them my strong conviction that acceptance of diverse perspectives will strengthen China, just as it has Canada.   In a world of rapid change, it is a diversity of ideas and the free ability to express them that drives positive change.   And I remind everyone that as a country that has seen first-hand the benefits of free expression and good governance, Canada encourages China to do more to promote and protect human rights. In the global village we all have a stake in what happens here.   The success of the world is inexorably linked to China's success.   And I know that these are not easy conversations to have, but they are necessary ones.   And as important as it is to me that our government seeks greater economy cooperation with China, so too must we promote the values that make us good economic partners and good friends.   Friendship should be open, honest, and constructive.   In the end, what I'm after on behalf of 36 million Canadians, is a friendship built to last. You see, we're Canadians.   We travel with our values and we don't hesitate to share them whenever and wherever we see opportunities.   And actually, there's an opportunity here tonight.   Gentlemen, it's 2016, we need more women at this head table. So as you see, the future of the Canada-China relationship is one that I'm very passionate about. It’s important to me because I sincerely believe that a renewed relationship between Canada and China is good for everyone.  Because a stronger and more stable relationship can help build and grow the middle class; because a prosperous middle class can, in turn, encourage greater and more prosperous economic growth; and because a stronger relationship will enable both of our countries to work together to satisfy not just our own interests, but also the needs of the entire planet. Now, before I finish, I want to take a moment to applaud the Canada China Business Council again for all the hard work it has done, in good times and in more challenging times, to foster this most important relationship.   It truly is a relationship that stretches back generations.   Back to my father, who visited this beautiful country many times, including during his time as Prime Minister with me in tow, because he recognized that a relationship with China was important.   Well, not for the first time, and not for the last, he was right about that. But before that, to Dr.  Norman Bethune, whose selflessness and generosity may have been rooted in his Canadian origins but found their highest expression right here in China.   And, of course, our business connections reach back further still, to the Bank of Montreal, Canada's first bank, which was the first to do business with China just three months after it was founded in 1818. In other words, Canada and China have a long history together.   It's a history we should honour, even as we seek to forge new paths together. I hope you will continue to work hard to help businesses in Canada and in China seize the opportunities for greater partnership that now lie before us because in the end, we are all served by taking the long view.   I've always believed that the purpose of leadership is to represent the future to the past and to the present.   History has a way of making the most controversial decisions obvious, but that does not diminish the courage of leaders of previous generations. And now, 45 years down the road, the world is self-evidently better off because they worked so hard to bring China into the global system. This morning I had the opportunity to hold my daughter's hand along the Great Wall of China.   Let me tell you, when you find yourself walking along a centuries old wall with your seven year-old daughter, the least you can do is think a few decades down the road.  Then the answers to the biggest questions become clear. Do we want a world built on diversity or division? One that prospers by expanding trade and creating growth, or one that makes us all poorer because we've thrown up walls and retreated behind them?  One where we work hard and work together to overcome our differences and build on common ground, or one where we keep our distance from people whose history and culture differ from our own?Well, we're going through a period of enormous change, my friends, in China, in Canada, and everywhere in between.   No country, no business, indeed, no person will be unaffected. The question before us is, therefore, whether we engage and actively work to choose and shape and seize our future, or fearfully and passively let it happen around us.   Well, I know that you all are here because you've already answered that question the right way.   It is the choice previous generations would expect of us, and for which our children will be thankful. We have a lot of work ahead of us, my friends, and I, for one, couldn't be more looking forward to it. Merci beaucoup, thank you, xiè xie. Mr.  Speaker, I would like to begin by acknowledging the hard work done by many of my colleagues. From my own caucus, I’d like to thank the Members from Surrey-Newton and Winnipeg North for their tireless advocacy.  They have petitioned the Canadian government for years to make the apology that will be made today.  I thank them for their commitment to this cause. From the Opposition benches, special mention must be made of the Members from Calgary Heritage, Calgary Midnapore and the former Member for Surrey North.  Each deserves recognition for the work they have done to seek resolution for victims and their families. As do the many organizations that have sought the same, in particular, the Professor Mohan Singh Memorial Foundation. Mr.  Speaker, today I rise in this House to offer an apology on behalf of the Government of Canada, for our role in the Komagata Maru incident. More than a century ago, a great injustice took place. On May 23, 1914, a steamship sailed into Burrard Inlet in Vancouver.  On board were 376 passengers of Sikh, Muslim and Hindu origin. Those passengers, like millions of immigrants to Canada since, came seeking better lives for their families.  Greater opportunities.  A chance to contribute to their new home. Those passengers chose Canada.  And when they arrived here, they were rejected. They were rejected because in the early years of the last century, the Government of Canada put in place a law that prohibited passengers from disembarking in Canada if the vessel they were on had stopped at any point during its journey here. This would have prevented immigrants from faraway countries such as India from entering Canada, because in that era, it was impossible to travel great distances by sea without making any stops. Because of this law, when the Komagata Maru arrived in Canada, only a small number of passengers were allowed to disembark.  The ship, and all remaining passengers on it, was ordered to leave. Members of the local Sikh community tried to convince authorities to reverse their decision, but those efforts were unsuccessful. And on July 23, 1914 – two months after it arrived – the Komagata Maru was escorted out of harbour by the Canadian military, and forced to return to India, where 19 passengers were killed and many others imprisoned. Mr.  Speaker, Canada does not bear alone the responsibility for every tagic mistake that occurred with the Komagata Maru and its passengers. But Canada’s government was, without question, responsible for the laws that prevented these passengers from immigrating peacefully and securely. For that, and for every regrettable consequence that followed, we are sorry. I apologize, first and foremost, to the victims of the incident. No words can fully erase the pain and suffering they experienced.  Regrettably, the passage of time means that none are alive to hear our apology today. Still, we offer it, fully and sincerely.  For our indifference to your plight.  For our failure to recognize all that you had to offer.  For the laws that discriminated against you, so senselessly. And for not formally apologizing sooner. For all these things, we are truly sorry. I also wish to apologize to the descendants of the passengers of the Komagata Maru, including those who are here with us here today.  We can never know what your lives would have been like had your relatives been welcomed to Canada.  The ways in which your lives would have been different. The ways in which Canada would have been enriched.  Those possibilities are lost to history. For that – and to you – we apologize. Just as we apologize for past wrongs, so too must we commit ourselves to positive action – to learning from the mistakes of the past, and to making sure that we never repeat them. That is the unique promise and potential of Canada. We believe that every person – no matter who they are, no matter where they came from – deserves a real and fair chance at success.  Canada’s South Asian community exemplifies this success every day. We believe that our diversity is a source of strength.  That we are strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them. And we believe in the values enshrined in our Charter of Rights and Freedoms, including multiculturalism.  Our government will ensure that these values are always upheld. Mr.  Speaker, before I finish, I would like to acknowledge one more Member who has helped to bring the Komagata Maru incident to our national attention – the Minister of National Defence. Before entering political life, the Minister was the commanding officer of The British Columbia Regiment Duke of Connaught’s Own – the same regiment that once forced out the Komagata Maru. A century ago, the Minister’s family might well have been turned away from Canada.  Today, the Minister sits beside us, here, in this House. In a House that includes immigrants.  That includes the daughters and sons – the granddaughters and grandsons – of immigrants. The very makeup of this House should remind all of us that when we have the choice between opening our arms to those in need or closing our hearts to them, we must always choose the more compassionate path. When we see injustice, we must speak up, and attempt to make things right. When we make mistakes, we must apologize, and recommit ourselves to doing better. Mr.  Speaker, Canada is a country unlike any other.  We are blessed to call it home. Let us always endeavour to do better, and to be better. Let us do that in honour of the victims of the Komagata Maru incident, and every courageous person who leaves behind family and familiar things, to bring to Canada the very best of who they are. Thank you. Thank you, Secretary General. I want to thank you personally for your continued leadership on this important issue.  It’s safe to say that we would not be here today if it was not for all the hard work that you and President Hollande put into making the Paris Agreement a reality. On behalf of Canadians and all world citizens, thank you for all you have done. I’m honoured to be back here at the United Nations, especially today, on Earth Day. I can’t think of a better place – nor a better day – to add Canada’s signature to the historic Paris Agreement on climate change. As I said last November in Paris, Canada views climate change not just as a challenge, but as an opportunity. A chance to build a clean growth economy that will help to fight climate change while creating good, well-paying jobs. It’s a challenge we’re already embracing. In the months since Paris, our government has met with our provincial and territorial premiers, as well as Indigenous and municipal leaders. Together, we’re creating a plan that will help us meet or exceed our emissions targets and encourage clean economic growth. To encourage actions that will reduce greenhouse gas emissions, we’re investing billions in a low-carbon economy fund. To get clean technology to market faster, we’re making immediate investments to support clean tech research and development. And alongside 19 other countries, we’ve signed on to Mission Innovation – a global partnership that aims to double government investment in clean energy innovation over five years, while encouraging private sector leadership in clean energy. These actions are just the beginning. We’re not making these investments simply to be nice, although I know Canada does have a reputation to uphold in that department. We’re making these investments – and we’re following through on our commitments – because it’s the right thing to do.  For our environment and our economy, and as part of the global community. The humanitarian case is clear.  We know that it will be the world’s poorest citizens who will be hardest hit by climate change – displaced by rising sea levels, left hungry by failed crops, more vulnerable to disease. Climate change will make more difficult every other challenge we face – whether it’s ensuring safe and secure food and water or responding to the needs of refugees. The business case is equally clear.  Last year, nearly a third of a trillion dollars was invested globally in renewable power – nearly 50% more than was invested in power from fossil fuels. That’s a trend that will continue to grow, and it’s one that represents a tremendous opportunity for Canada.  One that we cannot – and will not – ignore. At the same time, Canada’s ambition cannot end with making sure that we alone make the most of a challenging situation.  Developing countries have a role to play, too. They shouldn’t be punished for a problem they didn’t create, nor should they be deprived the opportunities for clean growth that developed nations are now pursuing. That is why Canada will also invest $2. 65 billion over the next five years to help the developing world grow in a cleaner, more sustainable way. These actions – along with tabling the Paris Agreement in the House of Commons next month and its eventual ratification later this year – confirm Canada’s commitment.  Not just to the United Nations, but to each other. Because it’s only when nations work together that we have any hope of addressing climate change. It’s only when we work together that we can learn from each other, build on shared knowledge, and develop economies that are as clean as they are competitive. At the end of the Paris negotiations, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said of the resulting agreement that “what was once unthinkable has now become unstoppable. ”Today, with my signature, I give you our word that Canada’s efforts will not cease. Climate change will test our intelligence, our compassion and our will.  But we are equal to that challenge. I encourage other signatories to move swiftly to follow through on their commitments, and encourage those countries that are not in a position to sign today to follow shortly. In every possible sense, we are all in this together. Together, we can make this a better world.  Thank you. Good afternoon everyone.  It’s my absolute pleasure to be here. You know, when I was asked to be a part of this event, I thought a lot about what I wanted to say. I thought we could talk about the importance of getting young people engaged in the political process – but I’m pretty sure you know how I feel about that. Or about how grassroots movements can be amazing catalysts for change – but again, I’m a fairly open book when it comes to that stuff. Ultimately, I decided that I wanted to talk to you today not as your Prime Minister, but as your Minister of Youth.  Which is the portfolio I assigned myself, by the way. I wanted to take on that extra responsibility because the challenges young people face have always been important to me, whether as a teacher or a volunteer or a politician.   Youth issues are Canada’s issues.   There is no separating the two.   Now, I know that when people are cynical about politics – both young and old – they tend to have the same complaint.  They say that politicians are “all talk and no action. ”Well, this is a lecture and Q&A format.   That means that I’m going to have to do some talking.   But what I want to focus on today are the actions that our government is taking to invest in Canada’s youth. Specifically, I want to touch on empowering young Canadians, on what we’re doing to help young Canadians get good jobs and work experience, and on the importance of equality and inclusion. There’s no question that young Canadians are interested in politics.   This room proves it.   And so does the ballot box. In the last election, Statistics Canada found that 18-24 year olds reported voting at a rate 12 percent higher than the previous election.  And that figure could rise even higher next time, if we put in the work needed to help young people feel empowered and engaged. In the next election in 2019, there will be 1. 5 million first-time voters.   We need to make sure that these future voters – now students in high school – are given an active role in the decision-making processes that will fundamentally shape their lives. So, what does that really mean?  What does it look like in practice?Well, as Minister of Youth, it will be my job to make sure that Cabinet considers items from the perspective of young Canadians.   And I’ll support my Cabinet colleagues in applying that same lens to the work that their ministry undertakes. To keep me up to speed on the issues that matter most to young Canadians, I’ll be launching the Youth Advisory Council made up of Canadians aged 16 to 24. And to make sure that young Canadians think about meaningful careers in government, we will work to modernize the public service.  You have so much to give, and your voices and perspectives are needed like never before. Your goals, your hopes, and your dreams for a better life will inform every decision this government makes.   That is my promise to you.   When it comes to getting good jobs and work experience, there’s a familiar refrain among young people.   I hear it in every community I visit.   Young people tell me that they can’t get a job because they don’t have any work experience, and they can’t get any work experience because they don’t have a job. It’s a vicious circle.   And our new government is taking steps to help break it. We’re establishing an expert panel on youth employment to assess the barriers that vulnerable youth face in finding and keeping jobs.   We need to better understand those challenges. At the same time, we know that you need help now, not months or years from now.    That’s why last month’s budget included real measures to address youth unemployment and underemployment, and real help for young people seeking their first jobs. That work starts in the classroom. To start, we’re investing in actual classrooms.  Over the next 3 years, we’ll be investing $2 billion in labs and buildings on college and university campuses. But perhaps more important, we’re investing in students – so that when young people go off to school, they can afford to stay in school. In Canada, every young person should have the opportunity to go to university or college.  It shouldn’t matter where you were born, or how much money your parents make.  We took real steps toward making that a reality with Budget 2016. We’ll boost Canada Student Grants by up to $1,000 per year for postsecondary students from low and middle income families.  This means more money in the pockets of 360,000 students each and every year. And our budget also includes more help for recent graduates. Beginning later this fiscal year, no student graduating from college or university will have to start paying back their Canada Student Loans until they are earning at least $25,000 per year.  This will help young people as they transition into work, giving them a bit of a break until they land on their feet. We’ll also support young people through significant new investments in skills training. Previously, the Government of Canada was spending $330 million per year on youth employment.  This year, we will invest almost twice that. These are just a few of the things we have planned to help students and new workers transition to meaningful, well-paying work. Investing in young Canadians is a smart bet.   I’m confident of that because I’ve seen what you’re capable of. I’m reminded almost daily of your unparalleled empathy for others, and of your genuine commitment to equality and inclusion.   I have often said that Canada is a country that is strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them.    This is true of Canada’s young people, and it is especially true of Indigenous youth.    We have a lot of work to do to make sure that all young people in Canada enjoy equal treatment and equal opportunity. This work won’t be easy.   Things that matter seldom are.   But I’m confident that if Canada and its Indigenous partners work together on a nation-to-nation basis, we can and we will ensure that Indigenous youth have a strong voice in shaping their futures. For our part, the government will invest $2. 6 billion over the next five years in primary and secondary education on reserves, to help First Nations students learn and succeed.   Every child deserves a quality education.   Equality and inclusion matters – no matter your background, no matter where you live.   Those are the principles that will guide the decisions we make as a government. When I look at the students here today, I feel  proud, and confident, and frankly, I feel reassured. You are the most educated, most connected, and most diverse generation that this country has ever seen.   You shape your communities in ways that couldn’t have been imagined even 20 years ago when I was in school. I was in the first class at McGill where everyone was given an email address, and it had more numbers in it than my CEGEP math textbook. But for you, technology is an asset, innovation is second nature, diversity is a source of strength, and collaboration is the expectation. You are the leaders, not of tomorrow – but of today.  Never forget this. What you do, what you say, and the choices you make have the power to change the world. Young people have long demanded more from their elected representatives and I’m here to tell you that our government expects no less of you. We need your help. Tell us your concerns. Keep us focused. And expect more than talk – demand action. My friends, this is a collaboration.   Together, we’ll create a future that we can be proud of for generations to come. Thank you. Mr.  President, First Lady, ladies and gentlemen.  What an extraordinary honour it is to be here with you tonight. Thank you so much for the warm welcome you have extended to Canada and the Canadian delegation, and to Sophie and me personally. Your hospitality, and your friendship, means the world to us. In thinking about what I wanted to say this evening, I came across a quote from President Truman, who shared these words with the Canadian parliament nearly 70 years ago. He said that Canada’s relationship with the United States “did not develop spontaneously . . .  (It) did not come about merely through the happy circumstance of geography,” but was “compounded of one part proximity and nine parts good will and common sense. ”It’s that enduring good will and common sense that I believe defines our relationship to this day. It’s what makes our constructive partnership possible. It’s what allows us to respectfully disagree, and remain friends and allies on the few occasions we do  For example, I would argue that it’s better to be the leader of a country that consistently wins Olympic gold medals in hockey.  President Obama would likely disagree. (To President) And yet you still invite us over for dinner.  Because that’s what friends do. But you know, now that I think of it, we’re actually closer than friends.  We’re more like siblings, really.  Born of the same parents, though we took different paths in our later years.  We became the stay at home type.  You grew to be a little more… rebellious. I think the reason that good will and common sense come so easily is because we are – Canadians and Americans alike – guided by the same core values. Values like cooperation and respect.  Cooperation, because it keeps us safe and prosperous.  And respect, because it’s the surest path to both safeguarding the world that we share and honouring the diverse people with whom we share it. When it comes to security, for example, we agree that our countries are stronger – and the world is safer – when we work together.  For more than half a century, we’ve joined forces to protect our continent.  And we’ve been the closest of allies overseas for even longer, fighting together on the beaches of France, standing shoulder to shoulder with our European partners in NATO, and  now confronting violent extremism in the Middle East. In every instance, we realized that our concerns were better addressed together than alone.  And together, we have realized the longest, most peaceful, and most mutually beneficial relationship of any two countries since the birth of the nation-state. It’s a relationship that doesn’t just serve our own interests – it serves the entire world. Canadians and Americans also value economic interdependence, because we know that it brings greater prosperity to all of us. Over $2. 4 billion worth of goods and services cross the border every day – evidence of one of the largest and most mutually beneficial trading relationships in the world. One of our most popular exports to the United States has been another Justin – Justin Bieber.  Now, this kid’s had a great year.  And of course, leave it to a Canadian to reach international fame with a song called “Sorry”. Together, Canada and the US negotiated trade agreements that have expanded opportunities for our businesses, created millions of good, well-paying jobs for our workers, and made more products more affordable for more Canadian and American families. We must never take that partnership for granted.  I can promise you that my government never will. Nor should we forget that our responsibilities extend beyond our own borders, and across generations. That means getting rid of the outdated notion that a healthy environment and a strong economy stand in opposition to each other. And it means that when it comes to issues like climate change, we need to acknowledge that we are all in this together.  Our children and grandchildren will judge us not by the words that we said but by the actions that we took, or failed to take. If we truly wish to leave to them a better world than the one we inherited from our own parents – and I know, Mr.  President, that you and the First Lady want this as strongly as Sophie and I do – we cannot deny the science.   We cannot pretend that climate change is still up for debate. And that’s why I’m so proud of the continental strategy we’ve negotiated to help take on this most serious challenge.  It’s a blueprint for real progress.  One that respects science and scientists.  That takes meaningful, measurable steps to protect our environment and combat climate change.  And it’s a plan that allows us to grow our economies as we do it. Thank you, Mr.  President, for your leadership and your partnership in this. And finally, we believe – Canadians and Americans – in the fundamental truth that diversity is a source of strength.   That we are thriving and prosperous countries not in spite of our differences, but because of them. Canadians know this.  It’s why communities across the country welcomed more than 25,000 Syrian refugees over the past four months.   Not as visitors or temporary citizens, but as Canadians.  And Americans understand this, too.   It’s why each generation has welcomed newcomers seeking liberty and the promise of a better life. We know that if we seek to be greater, we must do greater things.  Be more compassionate.  Be more accepting.   Be more open to those who dress differently, or eat different foods, or speak different languages.   Our identities as Canadians and Americans are enriched by these differences, not threatened by them. On our own, we make progress.  But together, we make history.  Duty-bound, loyal, and forever linked.  Whatever the future holds, we will face it together.  Neighbours, friends, partners, and allies.  That is our experience, and our example to the world. Mr.  President, thank you for all you have done these past seven years to preserve this most important relationship.   May the special connection between our two countries continue to flourish in the years to come.  And may my grey hair come in at a much slower rate than yours has. And with that, on behalf of 36 million Canadians, I propose a toast: to the President, to the First Lady, and to the people of the United States of America.  Cheers. Hello everyone.  I would like to thank the ministers of National Defence, International Development, and Foreign Affairs for joining me here today for this important announcement. Thank you Professor Schwab for your warm welcome and for bringing this impressive group together. I’d like to take a moment to recognize a founder of the World Economic Forum and a great Canadian, Maurice Strong, who passed away just a couple months ago. Maurice showed incredible leadership on a variety of issues facing the world today, and in particular early and compelling leadership on climate change. Today, we are gathered here to contemplate whether we are in the early stages of a fourth industrial revolution. What a breathtaking possibility that is. Steam power changed the world utterly.  So did electricity and more recently, computers.  And now we may be on the cusp of change equal in magnitude and far swifter in pace. New technology is always dazzling, but we don’t want technology simply because it is dazzling—we want it, create it and support it because it improves people’s lives. If we didn’t build the public infrastructure in the early 20th century to support mass electrification only the wealthy would have had heat and running water.  And with that, the creation of the middle class—the base of resilient economies—would never have happened.    Technology needs to serve the cause of human progress, not serve as a substitute for it, or as a distraction from its absence. Simply put, everybody needs to benefit from growth in order to sustain growth. It’s not hard to see how the connections between computing, information, robotics, and biotechnologies could deliver spectacular progress.  It’s also not hard to imagine how it could produce mass unemployment and greater inequality. Technology itself will not determine the future we get.  Our choices will.  Leadership will. I believe in positive, ambitious leadership.  I don’t believe leaders should prey on the anxiety of the disenfranchised. Leadership should be focused on extending the ladder of opportunity to everyone.  On pursuing policies that create growth, and on ensuring that growth produces tangible results for everyone. Positive leadership creates a virtuous cycle.  The more results we achieve for people, the more we grow the middle class, and create real chances for those working hard to join the middle class, the more people will grant you a license for further ambition.    We need to trust citizens.  We need to give people the tools and ability to help them succeed. The fourth industrial revolution will not be successful unless it creates real opportunity for the billions who weren’t able to join us here this week. In Canada we get this. We need education to enable people to learn, think, and adapt. We need infrastructure that supports change. We need policies that encourage science, innovation and research. We need societies that recognize diversity as a source of strength, not a source of weakness. And we need governments willing to invest in making all that happen, while recognizing the dynamic innovation that happens in the private sector. Just look at Silicon Valley.  It crackles with ideas and experimentation. Diversity is a major reason for Silicon Valley’s creativity.  It’s engineers and entrepreneurs come from all over the world.  Each brings a different perspective.  And when those diverse ways of seeing and thinking come together, they spark creativity. Diversity fosters new ideas.  New ideas generate the experimentation needed to make the most of the fourth industrial revolution. And diversity is something leaders can do much about. Recently, a New York Times reporter asked the president of Y Combinator—  major Silicon Valley startup funder—if any one school stood out as a source of graduates with sparkling new ideas.  He said there is one.  It is the University of Waterloo. That’s Canada’s University of Waterloo. Why does Silicon Valley look to it as a great source of brilliant minds and brilliant ideas?It has high intellectual standards, of course.  And it values entrepreneurship.  But diversity is its indispensable ingredient. Their students come from everywhere.  Fully half the graduate engineering students are international. And the University of Waterloo’s domestic students are drawn from Canada’s student population—one of the most diverse in the world. Now many of you have reached out to me recently in thanks for Canada’s compassionate response to the Syrian refugee crisis. But let me tell you something, when I welcomed those families to Toronto last month, I welcomed them as new Canadians and as the future of the Canadian economy. Diversity isn't just sound social policy.  Diversity is the engine of invention. It generates creativity that enriches the world. We know this in Canada.  Frankly, our recent election reminded us all that people can respond to a positive, inclusive vision of society. And that makes me profoundly optimistic and confident. Canada was mostly known for its resources.  I want you to know Canadians for our resourcefulness. I would bet that almost all of you have Canadians in leadership positions in your companies—you may not know it because we don’t often shout it from the rooftops, some clichés about Canadians are true.   In fact, at least half of you have hired Dominic Barton at one point or another. We have a diverse and creative population, outstanding education and healthcare systems, and advanced infrastructure.  We have social stability, financial stability and a government willing to invest in the future. It’s not a coincidence that Canada is always found at or near the top of lists that countries want to be at or near the top of. Canada has something else that isn’t so easily quantifiable.  Confidence. Canadians are remarkably confident.  We believe in progress.  And we are willing to work very, very hard to make it happen. Our natural resources are important, and they always will be.  But Canadians know that what it takes to grow and prosper isn’t just what’s under our feet, it’s what between our ears.   Our recent election showed that Canadians understand that confident countries invest in their future.   And these days, it seems the global supply of confidence is dwindling. Some now say that it is impossible to change the face of global inequality—we’ve gone too far down one road to alter our course and invest in shared prosperity.    Others insist that climate change is reason to despair.  It’s too late to avoid catastrophe, they say.  Or the only way to avoid catastrophe is to abandon economic growth. Still others question diversity.  People of different cultures and languages cannot live together harmoniously, they say.  Diversity means instability and insecurity.  Diversity is dangerous.   I don’t believe any of that. We can grow the middle class so that those who study and work hard and save will be rewarded. We can fight climate change without sacrificing growth and prosperity.  In fact, our global push toward a low-carbon economy will produce new companies, new growth, and new prosperity. And, yes, we can embrace diversity and the new ideas that spring from it, while simultaneously fostering a shared identity and shared values in safe, stable communities that work. The one thing certain about the next industrial revolution is like the three that preceded it, it will bring enormous change. If you are looking for a country that has the diversity, the resilience, the positivity and the confidence that will not just manage this change but take advantage of it, there has never been a better time to look to Canada.  Good morning. Thank you so much for your kind welcome. Before I begin, I’d like to recognize the Algonquin Nation, on whose traditional territory we are gathering.   We acknowledge them as the past, present and future caretakers of this land. Elders, youth, National Chief Bellegarde, members of the AFN executive and Chiefs-in-Assembly: thank you for the opportunity to be here with you today. When I last joined you, in July of this year, I said that I hoped you’d invite me back, whatever my job title might be. I’m so glad you took me up on that offer. As you know, a few things have changed since we last met.   But I’m also struck by the things that endure. Meeting with Canadians.  Hearing your stories.  And through those conversations, getting a better sense of what it is that people are going through. You can’t be an effective Member of Parliament if you’re not doing those things each and every day. And, that’s no less true when you’re Prime Minister. The difference is that as Prime Minister, my government now has the opportunity to take that understanding and transform it into action.   Or as last week’s Throne Speech put it, “make real change happen. ” One of the ways we will advance that agenda for real change is by making sure that the voices of Indigenous Peoples are heard in Ottawa. That starts with our new Members of Parliament.  Of the dozen Indigenous candidates that ran under my party’s banner during the last campaign, eight were elected to office.  Of those eight, two – Hunter Tootoo from Nunavut and Jody Wilson-Raybould from Vancouver – are now serving as cabinet ministers. They are joined at the cabinet table by an experienced and capable Minister of Indigenous and Northern Affairs, Carolyn Bennett.   Carolyn is new to that role, but as former Liberal critic for Aboriginal Affairs, she’s not new to the issues that matter to your members.  But as you’ve heard me say before, it’s not just about individual people, or even individual governments.   What’s needed is nothing less than a total renewal of the relationship between Canada and First Nations Peoples. During the election, I made a personal commitment to bring new leadership and a new tone to Ottawa.   I promised Canadians real change.   That includes not just doing different things, but also doing things differently.   Including the way that we, as a government, approach our relationships with others. History has shown that taking an adversarial approach is not only ineffective – it can be profoundly damaging. Nowhere is this more obvious than in the government’s relationship with First Nations. It is time for a renewed, nation-to-nation relationship with First Nations Peoples. One that understands that the constitutionally guaranteed rights of First Nations in Canada are not an inconvenience but rather a sacred obligation. One that is based on recognition of rights, respect, co-operation and partnership.  One that is guided by the spirit and intent of the original treaty relationship; one that respects inherent rights, treaties and jurisdictions; and one that respects the decisions of our courts. I know that renewing our relationship is an ambitious goal, but I am equally certain that it is one we can, and will, achieve if we work together. This is a responsibility I take seriously, and I have instructed my government to do the same. In the mandate letters given to government ministers, my expectations were clear.   I told them that no relationship is more important to me and to Canada than the one with First Nations, the Metis Nation, and Inuit Peoples. Today, I give you my word that we will renew and respect that relationship. We will work with you to rebuild trust.  We will tell the truth.  When we make mistakes – as all governments do – we will acknowledge our mistakes and learn from them.   And we will work together with First Nations as full partners, inspired by the values of mutual respect, sharing and caring. To that end, I’ve given the new Minister of Indigenous and Northern Affairs very explicit directions on how to move forward.  Among her top priorities will be the creation of a national public inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls in Canada.   I am pleased to announce that that process is already underway, and an update on our progress will be provided to you by Ministers Bennett, Wilson-Raybould and  Hajdu this afternoon. We have made this inquiry a priority for our government because those touched by this national tragedy have waited long enough.   The victims deserve justice, their families an opportunity to be heard and to heal. We must work together to put an end to this ongoing tragedy.  A second priority will be to make significant investments in First Nations education.   This is one funding area where we know we can’t afford to wait, and we won’t.  Every child and young person living in Canada deserves a real and fair chance at success.   First Nations students are no less deserving. At the same time, we will never impose solutions from the top down.   We know this approach is wrong, and we know it doesn’t work.   While we share a commitment to improving education outcomes, we believe that education reforms that affect First Nations children must be led by First Nations. Third, as National Chief Bellegarde alluded to, our government will immediately – as part of our first budget – lift the two percent cap on funding for First Nations programs.   As you know, that limit has been in place for nearly 20 years.   It hasn’t kept up with the demographic realities of your communities, nor the actual costs of program delivery.  It’s time for a new fiscal relationship with First Nations that gives your communities sufficient, predictable and sustained funding.   This is a promise we made, and a promise we will keep. Fourth, and in partnership with Indigenous communities, the provinces, territories and other vital partners, we will fully implement the calls to action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, starting with the implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. And fifth, we will conduct a full review of the legislation unilaterally imposed on Indigenous peoples by the previous government.  Where measures are found to be in conflict with your rights, where they are inconsistent with the principles of good governance, or where they simply make no public policy sense, we will rescind them. These are just five of the commitments we’ve made as part of our efforts to repair this most important relationship.  There are many other actions we will undertake, from partnering with First Nations as we review and monitor major resource development projects to providing significant new funding to help promote, preserve, and protect Indigenous languages and cultures. In every instance, we need your help. We cannot close the gaps between the First Nations experience and those of others without a collaborative, nation-to-nation approach, like the one that resulted in the Kelowna Accord. As leaders, that is a responsibility we share.  Working together as partners, I am confident that we can make meaningful and immediate progress on the issues that matter most to your communities – things like education, housing, employment, health and mental health care, community safety, child welfare, and stewardship over our land, water and air. Doing anything less is simply unacceptable.  All our communities and all our children deserve the better future I know we can deliver if we work together. As I said when we last met, a respectful, cooperative partnership is not only possible, it is a sacred responsibility inherited from past generations and entrusted to us by future ones. I promise you that I will be your partner in the years to come, and hope that you will be mine. Merci. I am honoured to represent Canadians at this historic meeting.  My message is simple.  Canada can and will do more to address the global challenge of climate change. We will do so because the science is indisputable, and tells us that our planet is already changing in ways that will have profound impacts on our future.  And we will do so because it’s the right thing to do, for our environment and our economy, and as part of the global community. Our government is making climate change a top priority, and our actions will be based on five principles. First, we will act based on the best scientific evidence and advice. Second, we will support and implement policies that contribute to a low-carbon economy, and this will include carbon pricing. Third, and very importantly, we will work with our provinces, territories, cities and Indigenous leaders who are taking a leadership role on climate change.  Indigenous peoples have known for thousands of years how to care for our planet.  The rest of us have a lot to learn.  And no time to waste. But they are not alone.  Canadian cities have also long been leaders in the fight to create clean growth and combat climate change.  There’s a lot that we, in other orders of government, can learn from our cities. Fourth, we will help the developing world tackle the challenges of climate change.  Many of the world’s most vulnerable countries have done little to contribute to the problem, but face the most significant consequences.  And all countries deserve the right to develop, and this development can and should be based on access to clean energy technologies. Finally, we view climate change not just as a challenge but as an historic opportunity. An opportunity to build a sustainable economy, based on clean technology, on green infrastructure, and on green jobs. We will not sacrifice growth; we will create growth.   I want to highlight the participation at COP 21 of several provincial and territorial premiers.  Our provinces have taken a leadership role in Canada with regard to climate change.  In the months to come, we will develop a pan-Canadian climate change framework, to assist us in  implementing the Paris agreement. This will include national emissions-reduction targets and, more importantly, a concrete plan to achieve them. Policy options will be informed by the best economic and scientific evidence.  These options include carbon pricing, support for energy efficiency, clean electricity and transport, and sustainable buildings and infrastructure.  Adaptation will be a core focus of our efforts.  And the plan will be flexible to the circumstances and policy approaches of the provinces and territories.  From cap-and-trade to a ban on coal-fired electricity generation.  From world leading innovation on carbon capture and storage to a revenue-neutral carbon tax.  We can learn from and build on these models. We will also emphasize innovation.  We will support sectors ranging from energy to forestry to agriculture, as they develop technologies to reduce emissions, create high-quality jobs, and contribute to long-term sustainable economic growth.   Our plan will build on the efforts of local governments, indigenous organizations, businesses, youth, the academic community, and non-governmental organizations, many of whom will be represented in Paris in the coming days. Canada will take on a new leadership role internationally. We will participate in collaborative initiatives, such as Mission Innovation and the Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition and we will seek out opportunities to work bilaterally or multilaterally, beginning with our North American partners.   We believe climate finance is critical. Our commitment of 2. 65 billion dollars over five years towards initiatives will help developing countries reduce their emissions and adapt to climate change. These efforts can bring about transformative change through increasing access to energy and poverty alleviation. A Paris agreement should reflect a new reality. The world has changed for the better. Global development has increased at a rapid pace.  But this means that we are going to need the efforts of those countries that are now in a position to help others reduce their emissions and adapt to climate change. The agreement also requires a prominent role for the private sector and multilateral institutions to mobilize finance.  Those who can act, must. COP 21 provides an opportunity for leaders to overcome old divisions and forge an ambitious, meaningful agreement, and an effective path forward. Collectively, we are already rising to the task, with more than160 countries representing over 90 percent of global emissions having committed to taking action.  This is unprecedented.  But the latest science tells us that we need to do more. Canada looks forward to playing a constructive role at COP 21. Our delegates are focussed on finding common ground to achieve an agreement with strong commitments and ambition, one that all parties are able to adopt and implement. We have an opportunity to make history in Paris - an agreement that supports a transition to a low-carbon economy that is necessary for our collective health, security, and prosperity.  Canada is back, my good friends.  We are here to help.  To build an agreement that will do our children and our grandchildren proud. Thank you. Quite a pleasure to be here, in London, with all of you today. Thank you, High Commissioner Campbell, and all of the staff here at Canada House. I also want to thank everyone here in the room, and all those joining us outside in the square, for taking the time to be with us today. Earlier today, I had the opportunity to meet with Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. She was, of course, gracious and insightful, with a unique and valuable perspective.  Her Majesty has been an important part of Canada’s history and, I am confident, will remain an important part of our continued progress and our future. And it’s that future, and Canada’s role in our shared future, that I’d like to address today. Canada has learned how to be strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them, and going forward, that capacity will be at the heart of both our success, and of what we offer the world. Our commitment to diversity and inclusion isn’t about Canadians being nice and polite—though of course we are.  In fact, this commitment is a powerful and ambitious approach to making Canada, and the world, a better, and safer, place. Why diversity is importantIt’s easy, in a country like Canada, to take diversity for granted.  In so many ways, it’s the air we breathe. We’ve raised generation after generation of children who think nothing of hearing five or six different languages spoken on the playground. Because it’s 2015, people around the world are noticing the diversity of our Cabinet, and our Parliament.  But the diversity of our country is not news. An MP colleague of mine once told me a story that captures it perfectly.  He was doing a parliamentary exchange program in Paris.  There were elected representatives from around the world present.  He was asked what Canada “looks like. ”He was accompanied by four other colleagues, none of whom except him were born in Canada.  Among them were three women and two men.  Two Catholics, an Ismaili Muslim, a Jew whose parents had survived the Holocaust, and a gay protestant minister.  One was born in France, one in Portugal.  Another was born in Argentina.  Another in Tanzania. He pointed to his colleagues and said: “Well, this.  This is what Canada looks like. ”One-fifth of Canadians were born elsewhere, and chose to immigrate to Canada.  In our largest city, more than half were born outside Canada. Against that backdrop, the importance of diversity can sometimes be taken for granted.  But there is no doubt that we’re a better country—a stronger, more successful country—because of it. Just consider the words that people use to describe Canada: we’re open, accepting, progressive and prosperous.  There is a direct line between each of those attributes and Canada’s success in building a more diverse and inclusive society. We’re not the only nation that’s tried to do it.  But what’s made it work so well in Canada is the understanding that our diversity isn’t a challenge to be overcome or a difficulty to be tolerated.  Rather, it’s a tremendous source of strength. Canadians understand that diversity is our strength.  We know that Canada has succeeded—culturally, politically, economically—because of our diversity, not in spite of it.  In typical Canadian fashion, we don’t celebrate this success often enough.  But I would argue that now, more than ever, the world needs us to do just that.  In the wake of horrific events like the recent attacks in Paris, as we renew our resolve to work with the international community to help prevent such attacks, and as we reaffirm our steadfast participation in the coalition against ISIL, we must also recommit to building a world where diversity and difference are promoted and celebrated. We know that peace is possible, and that hope beats fear every single time. How and why Canada does diversity bestCanada’s story proves that diversity and inclusion work.  Not just as aspirational values, but as a proven path to peace and prosperity. It hasn’t always been easy.  We have had stumbles along that path. We need to recognize that for Indigenous Peoples, the Canadian reality has not been—and is not today—easy, equitable or fair.  We need to acknowledge that our history includes darker moments: the Chinese head tax, the internment of Ukrainian, Japanese, and Italian Canadians during the First and Second World Wars, our turning away boats of Jewish or Punjabi refugees, our own history of slavery. Canadians look back on these transgressions with regret and shame—as we should. But our history was also filled with many positive moments. The Underground Railroad.  The Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  The Multiculturalism Act.  The Official Languages Act.  The welcoming of Ismaili Muslims.  The freedom for Jews and Sikhs, Hindus and Evangelicals to practice their religion as they choose. These positive changes can never right historical wrongs.  But they can serve to remind us that, in the phrase so beloved of Martin Luther King Jr. , “The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice. ”Like many other nations, Canada faces a constant debate between those who would have us restrict, close ranks, and build walls—and those who remind us that we are who we are precisely because we are open diverse and inclusive.  The last election campaign provides a good example.  It was, in part, about whether Canadians still believe in those values.  Many had their doubts.  But let me tell you this.  I’m standing here today as Prime Minister of Canada because Canadians rejected the forces that would divide us against ourselves. But we don’t need a national election to see Canada’s commitment to diversity in action.  We see it in our communities each and every day. While a few allow themselves to be overwhelmed by anger and outrage, as a society, cooler heads and warmer hearts ultimately prevail. Whenever, or wherever, a few seek to threaten those who look, or dress, or pray differently; many others stand up and say: “No.  Not here.  Not in our community, not to our neighbours. ”Time after time, when intolerance rears its ugly head, Canadians rise up to reject it.  We prove—clearly and unflinchingly—that we are better than that. I’d like to share with you a few very recent examples. One day after the attacks in Paris, a mosque in Peterborough, Ontario, was set on fire—a suspected hate crime.  In response, the community rallied, and raised more than $110,000 in two days to help the Muslim community rebuild.  United in faith, members of local Christian and Jewish communities opened their doors—literally opened their doors—to give their Muslim neighbours a place to pray.  Those are Canadian values. In Kitchener, Ontario, a Hindu temple was vandalized—its windows smashed by rocks, while the congregation's head preacher attended a vigil for those who died in the Paris attacks.  A Muslim group in the Toronto area started a fundraiser to help repair the damage. Those are Canadian values. The importance of a strong middle classAs important as these values are, they cannot exist in isolation.  It’s essential that they are supported by economic policies that benefit Canadians. Canada’s economy depends on a strong and growing middle class.  This has always been the case. In the last century, Canada’s growing and optimistic middle class created a big-hearted, broad-minded consensus.  Together, these hard-working Canadians built a better country, not just for themselves, but for their children, and for each other. By keeping our focus squarely on helping the middle class and all those who are working hard to join it, we can deliver real economic growth that will benefit all. That’s a worthwhile goal in its own right, but it’s also important because we know that a diverse country doesn’t work without it. When opportunities are limited, when people don’t think they have a real and fair chance to succeed, fear eats away at hope.  Economic stress manifests itself in many ways.  Fear and mistrust of others who are different is one of its most common, most dangerous, expressions. In other words, middle class growth is much more than an economic imperative—it’s central to our unity as a nation. It’s that shared sense of purpose that’s so hard to define but so deeply felt.  The feeling that we are all in this together.  The knowledge that wherever we came from, we are united not only in our struggles, but also in our dreams. It is the middle class that unites us, and it’s our diverse communities that keep our economy growing.  We need both to succeed. Canada’s role in the worldProviding greater support to our middle class is an important domestic objective, but there is also a critical role for Canada to play in sharing its success with the world. As the century unfolds, and as economic and environmental trends make migration between states the “new normal,” more and more countries will find themselves faced with challenges that Canada confronted long ago. We’veWe’ve gotten an important thing right in Canada.  Not perfect, but right.  That thing is the balance between individual freedom and collective identity. We know that people are defined in large part by our relationships to other people.  Our cultural background, our gender, our religious beliefs, our sexual orientation. However, we also believe that all of those collective associations receive their highest expression in the form of real, flesh and blood, individual human beings. We expand cultural freedom by ensuring that individual Canadians who come from these diverse communities have the freedom to live and express and grow and change their cultures. We refuse to see a contradiction between individual liberty and collective identity.  In fact, we have created a society where both thrive, and mutually reinforce one another. It was at its root, a leap of faith, and a very new idea.  Over time, we learned to trust that whatever their culture of origin, the more people engage with the breadth of our country’s diversity, the more Canadian they will become. Where there was repression, it would be defeated by the more compelling Canadian opportunity to achieve liberty.  Where there was isolation, we would meet it with openness and inclusion. It may have started as a leap of faith, but it has become a defining characteristic of our country, our great success, and arguably our greatest contribution to the world. We have proven that a country—an astonishingly successful country—can be built on the principle of mutual respect. In characteristically Canadian fashion, we don’t celebrate this success often enough.  But the world needs us to do so.  Especially now. One of the most difficult and urgent global problems is how to develop societies where people of different cultures can live together and build common ground.  And collectively, we face the influx of refugees fleeing a violent conflict. One of the most difficult and urgent global problems is how to develop societies where people of different cultures can live together and build common ground.  And collectively, we face the influx of refugees fleeing a violent conflict. Yesterday, our government laid out a plan that would see 25,000 Syrian refugees approved for resettlement by the end of the year, with all expected to arrive in Canada within a few months. We’ve done it before.  Under Prime Minister Joe Clark in the late 1970s and early 1980s, Canada resettled nearly 60,000 refugees from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. We’ve done it before, and we will do it again, because we know that we are not just resettling refugees, we are welcoming new Canadians. And more, Canada can also export the ideas and institutions that make diversity work so well at home. We know how to govern in a way that is inclusive, transparent, respectful and effective.  We can share that expertise with other countries and their citizens.  We know how to work cooperatively with our allies to combat terrorism, and how to be an effective partner in international peace operations.  We can contribute more to those international efforts, and have committed to do so. And we know how to do what former UN Secretary General Annan called for in 2013: “learn from each other, (and make) our different traditions and cultures a source of harmony and strength, not discord and weakness. ” We have a responsibility—to ourselves and to the world—to show that inclusive diversity is a strength, and a force that can vanquish intolerance, radicalism and hate. Canada’s success as a diverse and inclusive nation didn’t happen by accident, and won’t continue without effort. The future is never certain.  It depends on the choices we make today. Compassion, acceptance, and trust; diversity and inclusion—these are the things that have made Canada strong and free.  Not just in principle, but in practice. Those of us who benefit from the many blessings of Canada’s diversity need to be strong and confident custodians of its character. Let us not close our hearts to those in need, nor our minds to the knowledge that better is always possible. We are, after all, Canadian. Let’s show the world the very best of what that means. Thank you. It is with deep sadness that I learned of the deadly terrorist attack on a nightclub in Istanbul that killed and injured innocent people celebrating the New Year and claimed the life of a Canadian citizen. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the families and friends of all of the victims of this horrible act, and we hope and pray that those injured have a rapid and complete recovery. We mourn with the people of Turkey today and with all countries who lost citizens in this vicious attack. We also grieve the senseless loss of a Canadian citizen and remain steadfast in our determination to work? with allies and partners to fight terrorism and hold perpetrators to account. This week, Orthodox Christians in Canada and around the world will celebrate Christmas. This joyful time of year is an opportunity to gather with family and friends to reflect on the many blessings in our lives.  It also gives us a chance to reaffirm our commitment to live in a peaceful, inclusive society. This year marks our nation’s 150th anniversary.  Openness and acceptance are at the heart of what it means to be Canadian, and we should take every opportunity we can to celebrate the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Let us also use this occasion to show greater compassion and humanity to those most vulnerable, at home and around the world. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish you and your family a merry Christmas, and health and happiness in the year ahead. It is with great sadness that I learned of the death of former Portuguese Prime Minister and President Mario Soares. For more than 50 years, Mr.  Soares tirelessly served the Portuguese people.  He will be remembered as a figure who, as an activist and political leader, played a central role in bringing democracy back to Portugal and later, as a statesman, became a leader in Europe and on the world stage. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of Mr.  Soares, and to the Portuguese people.  His legacy as one of the builders of modern Portugal will not be forgotten. Today, Tamils in Canada and around the world will gather to celebrate Thai Pongal. This festival marks the end of the harvest season and the start of the new year.  Friends and families will come together to give thanks for a prosperous harvest and a season of good fortune.  It is a time for joy, celebration, and community. In 2016, the House of Commons voted unanimously to recognize every January as Tamil Heritage Month.  I encourage everybody to reflect on the strong heritage of Canada’s Tamil community.  Our nation is stronger and richer because of the contributions of Tamil-Canadians. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating Thai Pongal a joyful festival.  Today, we pay tribute to Raoul Wallenberg, a remarkable hero and humanitarian who saved tens of thousands of Hungarian Jews from almost certain death in Nazi extermination camps. As a Swedish diplomat in Nazi-occupied Hungary, Mr.  Wallenberg issued a special ‘protective passport’ to Jews, the Schutz-Pass, which identified its bearers as Swedish subjects and conferred some protection on them.  He distributed these passports indiscriminately, saving tens of thousands of Jews from deportation. He also created a network of safe havens operating under the Swedish flag.  These safe houses, hospitals, child care centres, and soup kitchens offered shelter to those fleeing persecution and protected many Schutz-Pass holders and other Jews.  He helped diplomats from other neutral powers – such as Switzerland and the Vatican – to do the same, protecting even more lives. Over the course of six months, Mr.  Wallenberg’s heroism and ingenuity saved more Jews from the horrors of the Holocaust than any single organization or government. Tragically, Mr.  Wallenberg disappeared after being captured by Soviet forces near the end of the war.  Although his fate remains unknown, his legacy lives on through the many awards, monuments, institutions, forests, and anti-racism campaigns that bear his name. In 2001, the Government of Canada designated January 17 as Raoul Wallenberg Day to honour Canada’s first honorary citizen, and to mark the day he disappeared in 1945. Today, I encourage all Canadians to celebrate the courage and compassion of Mr.  Wallenberg.  He demonstrated the best of humanity, and showed that it only takes one individual to change the world for the better.  May his life and legacy inspire us all. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to extend my congratulations to Donald J.  Trump on his inauguration as 45th President of the United States of America. Canada and the United States have built one of the closest relationships between any two countries in the world.  This enduring partnership is essential to our shared prosperity and security. Together, we benefit from robust trade and investment ties, and integrated economies, that support millions of Canadian and American jobs.  We both want to build economies where the middle class, and those working hard to join it, have a fair shot at success. Canada and the United States have unparalleled cooperation on matters of national security, and have always worked side by side to protect our citizens and ensure our shared border is secure. We look forward to working with President Trump, the U. S.  Administration, the 115th Congress, and officials at the state and local levels to restore prosperity to the middle class on both sides of the border, and to create a safer and more peaceful world. One year ago in La Loche, Saskatchewan, four Canadians were senselessly killed and seven more were injured.  On this tragic anniversary, our thoughts are with the victims, their loved ones, and all those whose lives were forever changed that day. Over the past year, the people of La Loche have inspired an entire country with their resilience, determination to rebuild, and optimism for a better future.  Our government is working every day to help realize that future, and we will continue to partner with the community, Indigenous Peoples, and all orders of government to address the issues facing La Loche. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I join all Canadians in solemn commemoration of this anniversary.  To the community of La Loche, please accept our deepest sympathies and know that you have our unwavering support. I want to thank all Parliamentary Secretaries who have served our government and the Canadian people during our first 14 months in office.  At the same time, I am delighted to announce 34 parliamentary secretaries who will work with their respective cabinet ministers to deliver real results for Canadians.  This team’s talent, dedication, and breadth of experience will prove invaluable as we pursue our plan to rebuild and strengthen Canada’s middle class, and deliver long-term economic growth that is felt by all Canadians. The parliamentary secretaries involved in today’s announcement are either newly appointed, staying in their current portfolio, or taking on new responsibilities.  Parliamentary Secretaries will resume or take on their duties on January 30, 2017, as will Andrew Leslie, who was recently appointed as Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Foreign Affairs (Canada-U. S.  Relations). I am also pleased to announce the appointment of Filomena Tassi as the Deputy Government Whip, effective January 30, 2017.  Ms.  Tassi will join Chief Government Whip Pablo Rodriguez in helping implement the priorities of the Government of Canada in Parliament. Each of these individuals, from a variety of backgrounds and communities across Canada, bring their own skills and points of view to government.  I am confident they will complement our current cabinet strengths and help build an even better future for all Canadians. Today, on the 72nd anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau, we remember the more than six million Jews murdered during the Holocaust and the countless other victims of Nazi brutality. The Holocaust serves as a tragic reminder of the horrors that can be born of racism and hate.  We must always remember those who experienced the worst of humanity – in ghettos, cattle cars, and Nazi death camps – and never forget our collective responsibility to prevent the seeds of intolerance and hate from taking root in our communities, country, and world. As we take time today to reflect on the haunting legacy of the Holocaust, let us pay tribute to the strength and spirit of the Jewish people and the many others who persevered during one of the darkest periods of human history. Today, and every day, we reaffirm our commitment to stand against anti-Semitism, xenophobia, and prejudice in all its forms.  It is through this commitment that we remember those we have lost and honour those whose stories must never be forgotten. In the days ahead, the Vietnamese community in Canada and around the world will mark T?t Nguyên Ðán, the Lunar New Year, and welcome the arrival of the year of the Rooster, which in 2017 is also known as the year of the Fire Rooster. As family and friends get together and share special meals, T?t Nguyên Ðán is an occasion to reflect on the past year and celebrate the arrival of spring. This year, as we celebrate our country’s 150th anniversary, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Vietnamese Canadians have made enormous contributions to Canada and have helped make it the strong and diverse place it is today. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those marking this occasion a very happy New Year. Today, Chinese Canadians will begin several days of celebrations for the New Year when they honour the beginning of the year of the Rooster, which in 2017 is also known as the year of the Fire Rooster. During this special time, friends and families will join together to celebrate their hopes for a prosperous year to come.  Celebrations are marked throughout Canada with many traditions including feasts and parades. This year, as we celebrate our country’s 150th anniversary, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Chinese Canadians have made enormous contributions to Canada and have helped make it the strong and diverse place it is today. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those marking this occasion a very happy New Year. This week, Korean communities in Canada and around the world will celebrate Seollal and welcome the arrival of the year of the Rooster. Seollal is the most important traditional Korean holiday.  This joyful time is an opportunity to reflect on the year that has passed, recognize good fortune, and look to the year ahead with hope and optimism. To usher in the Korean New Year, family and friends will gather to celebrate, pay their respects to their elders and ancestors, and enjoy traditional feasts. This year, as we celebrate our country’s 150th anniversary, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Korean Canadians have made enormous contributions to Canada and have helped make it the strong and diverse place it is today. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating Seollal health, peace, and success. It was with tremendous shock, sadness and anger that I heard of this evening’s tragic and fatal shooting at the Centre culturel islamique de Québec located in the Ste-Foy neighbourhood of the city of Québec. We condemn this terrorist attack on Muslims in a centre of worship and refuge. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of all those who have died, and we wish a speedy recovery to those who have been injured. While authorities are still investigating and details continue to be confirmed, it is heart-wrenching to see such senseless violence.  Diversity is our strength, and religious tolerance is a value that we, as Canadians, hold dear. Muslim-Canadians are an important part of our national fabric, and these senseless acts have no place in our communities, cities and country.  Canadian law enforcement agencies will protect the rights of all Canadians, and will make every effort to apprehend the perpetrators of this act and all acts of intolerance. Tonight, we grieve with the people of Ste-Foy and all Canadians. Throughout our history, Black Canadians have played a key role in building and shaping the diverse, compassionate, and prosperous country that we are all so proud to call home.  Every February, Canadians celebrate Black History Month by acknowledging the remarkable achievements and contributions that Canadians of African and Caribbean descent have made to Canada.   I urge all Canadians to reflect on the bravery and courage of individuals like Viola Desmond, a prominent Black Canadian businesswoman who changed the course of Canadian history by defiantly refusing to leave a whites-only area of a movie theatre in 1946. In recognition of her impact on the civil rights and freedoms movement in Canada, the Government of Canada chose Viola Desmond as the face of Canada’s ten dollar bank note. This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us never forget the stories of Black Canadians’ courage in the face of intolerance.  Diversity is our greatest strength, and we must always continue to build a country that affords equality and opportunity for all. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to participate in the many events that will take place across the country throughout February. Together, let us celebrate the heritage of Black Canadians, and honour the integral role they have played in shaping our democratic and free society. On this day, 40 years ago, Canada became a Dialogue Partner of ASEAN. As a Pacific nation, Canada has strongly supported ASEAN’s goal of maintaining the peace, stability, and security that have allowed Southeast Asia – and the wider Asia-Pacific region – to develop and prosper. The ties between Canadians and the peoples of Southeast Asia have never been stronger.  Canada, after all, is home to over one million people from Southeast Asia.  Their communities enrich our national fabric every day, and greatly contribute to one of our country’s most fundamental strengths: our diversity.  We also have strong economic links to ASEAN, with over $21 billion in two-way merchandise trade in 2015. In recent years, we have deepened our partnership with ASEAN by expanding our resident diplomatic footprint to all ten member states, appointing a dedicated ambassador to ASEAN, and supporting many initiatives that have promoted peace and prosperity throughout the region. Canada’s engagement with ASEAN will continue to grow as we work together to create a better, safer, and more prosperous world. Today, as we celebrate 40 years of partnership with ASEAN, I encourage all Canadians to reflect on the tremendous contributions made by Southeast Asian Canadians to our country. Canada’s international development workers and volunteers are selfless, generous, and dedicated individuals who work tirelessly – here at home and around the world – to improve the lives of millions of people. During International Development Week, I encourage all Canadians to celebrate – and to learn about – those who do so much to build a more just and compassionate world. This year’s theme – Leave no one behind: Canada contributes to global goals! – highlights our collective efforts to achieve the goals laid out in the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.  Canada will continue to show global leadership in bringing people together to help achieve lasting progress. Over the past year, we have consulted Canadians and our international partners in order to craft a new approach to international assistance.  Our refocused efforts will help the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people, including by promoting human rights, women’s empowerment and gender equality, and respect for diversity and inclusion. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to join me in thanking our international development workers and partners for their commitment to building a better world. This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us reflect on the achievements the maple leaf flag represents: the hard work that has built this country, the sacrifices made by so many to keep it free, and the hard-won victories to ensure that compassion and diversity remain the cornerstones of our democracy. Few national symbols are as iconic as the maple leaf.  Beavers and canoes may be just as enduring, but only the maple leaf has come to represent unity, hope, generosity, openness, and respect – and the nation and its people who live up to those values every day.  It is fitting that this cherished symbol is at the heart of Canada’s flag. Today, I invite all Canadians to reflect on what the maple leaf flag means to them, what it stands for around the world, and how it has helped shape our national identity.  I also invite you to take part in Canadian Heritage’s Share your moment with the flag challenge and celebrate one of our greatest national symbols. It is with sadness that I learned of the death of René Préval, a two-term president of Haiti. Mr.  Préval was first elected as President in 1996.  He left office in 2001, becoming Haiti’s first elected president to serve a full term, before returning to the presidency for another full term in 2006. Canada will remember his commitment to democracy as we continue to support Haiti’s development, and work with the Haitian people to address the economic and humanitarian challenges facing their country. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I offer our condolences to Mr.  Préval’s family and friends, and to the Haitian people. Today, we join people all over the globe to celebrate the remarkable achievements that women have made everywhere, and reaffirm our commitment to gender equality worldwide. This year, Canada’s theme for International Women’s Day is #EqualityMatters, which reminds us that society is better – more prosperous, peaceful, secure, and cohesive – when women’s rights are respected, when women are valued and empowered, and when they lead the way in our communities. While we have taken significant steps toward gender equality, we know that much more work needs to be done.  Women around the world continue to receive lower pay and fewer promotions.  They are denied legal control over their bodies and reproductive health.  They face much higher rates of harassment and verbal, physical, and sexual abuse.  In impoverished communities, women are the least likely to have access to healthcare, the last ones to eat, and the most vulnerable to the hardships brought on by disease. That is why we will continue to place gender equality and rights, and the empowerment of women and girls, at the heart of our international development work.  These efforts received a considerable boost this morning with the announcement that Canada will provide $650 million in funding to address gaps in sexual and reproductive health and rights in the world’s poorest and most vulnerable communities. Today, I remind Canadians that we all have a role to play in the fight for gender equality, and that we all benefit from a more gender equal world.  Women and men, girls and boys, we must all step up and speak out, because half of the population cannot solve a problem that affects us all. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to join us in celebrating International Women’s Day, as we renew our commitment to a more positive, just, and equal world. Tomorrow at sunset, Jewish communities in Canada and around the world will join together to celebrate Purim. Purim is a joyous holiday where loved ones wear costumes, exchange gifts, give to charity, and partake in traditional feasts. During this time, friends and family will come together to read the Megillah, which tells the story of how Queen Esther and her uncle Mordecai saved the Jewish people from persecution in ancient Persia. We honour this celebration of triumph over persecution and oppression as both a testament to the resilience, bravery, and joy of the Jewish people, and as a reaffirmation of our responsibility to stand against anti-Semitism, xenophobia, and prejudice.  The government denounces recent acts of anti-Semitism, and other acts of religious intolerance, in the strongest terms.  We cannot – and will not – tolerate any expressions of hatred and discrimination in our communities. On behalf of all Canadians and our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a joyous Purim. Chag Purim Sameach!Today, the citizens of the Commonwealth of Nations honour the common ties and shared values that unite all 52 member countries. Headed by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, the Commonwealth family spans Africa, Asia, the Americas, Europe, and the Pacific; it includes more than two billion people, and many different backgrounds, cultures, and languages.  This year’s theme – ‘A peace-building Commonwealth’ – reminds us that diversity and inclusion form a proven path to peace and prosperity. The Commonwealth is a champion of democracy, freedom, sustainable development, the rule of law, and human rights, especially the rights of women and girls.  As a member of the Commonwealth, Canada remains committed to protecting and promoting these values. I invite all Canadians to use today as an opportunity to learn more about the shared history and values that bind the peoples of the Commonwealth. This week, Canadians of the Hindu faith will celebrate Holi, also known as the Festival of Colours. This festival marks the end of winter and the beginning of spring.  It is an opportunity to celebrate peace, renew friendships, and look forward to new beginnings with optimism and joy.  It is also a time to reflect on the traditional notions of good and evil, and the ultimate triumph of light over darkness.  Holi is celebrated by Hindus and non-Hindus alike across Canada, South Asia, and around the world. To mark this happy occasion, family and loved ones gather to sing, dance, eat delicacies, light bonfires, and paint each other with brightly coloured powders and dyes. This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Canadians of the Hindu faith have made enormous contributions to Canada and have helped make it the strong and diverse country it is today. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating Holi a fun, joyous, and colourful festival. Today, we join Persian, Central Asian, Kurdish, and Ismaili Canadians to celebrate the festival of Nowruz. This ancient festival has been observed for thousands of years to welcome the coming of spring and the New Year in the Persian calendar.  It is a time for friends and family to join together at the haft-seen table – displaying seven items symbolizing the blessings of life – to exchange gifts, enjoy music, and share food.  Nowruz, which means new day in Farsi, is also an opportunity to renew our collective commitment to harmony, acceptance, and understanding. This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I invite all Canadians to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada the vibrant and inclusive place it is today.  Let us take this time to recognize and celebrate the contributions of Persian, Central Asian, Kurdish, and Ismaili Canadians across the country. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish a healthy and prosperous new year to all those celebrating Nowruz in Canada and around the world. On the International Day of La Francophonie, we join Francophones in Canada and around the world to celebrate the French language and francophone culture. Throughout our history, Francophones have helped make Canada a dynamic, inclusive and open country.  Today, we celebrate the many contributions of this community, which has played and continues to play a central role in building Canada, as well as the values that unite us such as cooperation, solidarity and democracy. This day is also an opportunity to pay tribute to the deep ties we share with the global Francophone community.  Canada is committed to continue building a better world by promoting the values we hold dear, including peace, diversity and respect for human rights. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I extend my best wishes to everyone around the world celebrating the International Day of La Francophonie. Today, we come together to recognize the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.  Whether here in Canada or around the world, racism devalues individuals, divides communities, and breeds fear and animosity throughout society. In Canada, diversity is a source of strength and a fundamental pillar of our country’s success.  While we have made important progress in the fight against racism and racial discrimination in recent decades, much work still needs to be done.  Far too many people around the world continue to be denied their most basic human rights simply because of the colour of their skin or their ethnic background. The Government of Canada strongly condemns any form of discrimination at home and in our global community.  We will continue to promote inclusiveness, acceptance, and equality in Canada and around the globe, and will never stop working for a safer, more equal, and more respectful world.   On this important day, we reaffirm our ongoing responsibility to speak out against racism, hate, xenophobia, and bigotry in all its forms.  Silence is not an option because progress is never permanent. We strongly condemn today’s attack in London.  I was shocked and saddened to learn of the innocent people who were killed and injured as a result of this cowardly attack. Canada and the U. K.  are the closest of friends and allies.  Our friendship is based on shared values and history – indeed, Canada’s Parliament is a descendant of the Chamber targeted this morning. Today’s attack on the U. K.  Parliament is an attack on democracies around the world. The Canadian Parliament withstood a similar attack not so long ago by those who sought to instil fear and divide Canadians against themselves.  Instead, Canadians came together.  I am confident the British people will do the same, and will emerge from their grief stronger and more united than ever before. On behalf of all Canadians, I offer our full support to Prime Minister May and to the people of the United Kingdom.  We stand ready to offer all possible assistance to the British government, to do what we can to bring to justice those responsible for this heinous act. Canadians stand united with the British people in the fight against terrorism.  We will continue to work together with the U. K.  and all our allies to show the world that freedom and democracy will always triumph. The Honourable Judy Foote is taking a leave of absence from her position as Minister of Public Services and Procurement.  She will be away until further notice for personal and family reasons.  As Parliamentarians, our family should always be our priority, and I commend her for taking the time to be with her loved ones.  We look forward to having her back in Ottawa. During her leave of absence, her ministerial duties will be performed by the Honorable Jim Carr who will serve as acting Minister of Public Services and Procurement, in addition to being Minister of Natural Resources. Canada fully supports the United States’ limited and focused action to degrade the Assad regime’s ability to launch chemical weapons attacks against innocent civilians, including many children.  President Assad’s use of chemical weapons and the crimes the Syrian regime has committed against its own people cannot be ignored.  These gruesome attacks cannot be permitted to continue with impunity. This week’s attack in southern Idlib and the suffering of Syrians is a war crime and is unacceptable.  Canada condemns all uses of chemical weapons. Canada will continue to support diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis in Syria. Canada strongly condemns the apparent terrorist attack in Stockholm today, which killed and injured many innocent people. Sophie and I join all Canadians in offering our deepest condolences to the families and friends of those killed in this cowardly attack.  We also hope and pray for a speedy recovery for all those wounded. Canada grieves with our Swedish friends in this difficult time and we offer all possible assistance. We will continue working with our international partners and allies, including Sweden, to fight terrorism and help prevent these senseless acts. Today, we celebrate the founding of the World Health Organization (WHO), and highlight our shared global responsibility to promote better health. This year, the campaign for World Health Day – Depression: let’s talk – is focused on how depression affects people of all ages, from all walks of life, all around the world. One in three Canadians will experience a mental illness during their lifetime, but these serious health problems are not always visible.  By talking about depression and mental health openly and honestly, we can help end the stigma that too often acts as a barrier for those who want and need help. This year’s World Health Day reminds us that there can be no health without mental health.  That is why, working with provinces and territories, we have committed $5 billion over the next ten years to support mental health initiatives, so that more Canadians can get the help they need. The Government of Canada will continue to help communities address their unique mental health challenges and to work together with the WHO to promote mental health and our collective well-being. Today, I encourage all Canadians to join the international community to celebrate World Health Day and to raise awareness about depression.  We all have a role to play to create more open conversations about mental health, and to help each other get the care we need. One hundred years ago, on a gentle slope in France, the four divisions of the Canadian Corps fought for the first time as one.  They were ordinary – yet extraordinary – men, from all corners of the country: Francophone, Anglophone, new Canadians, Indigenous Peoples. On Easter Monday, April 1917, battling through snow, sleet, and constant machine gun fire, they broke through an impregnable fortress and achieved a historic victory.  They succeeded where other armies had failed – but at a great cost.  Nearly 3,600 Canadians lost their lives.  Over 7,000 more were wounded.  The Battle of Vimy Ridge remains one of the bloodiest battles in Canada’s history. Despite these losses, Canadian bravery and ingenuity won the day and led to one of the most decisive victories in the First World War.  The innovative fighting techniques used so effectively by our soldiers at Vimy Ridge would contribute to the final Allied victory a year and a half later. Many of the soldiers wearing the Canadian uniform that day were immigrants to this country.  People of many languages and backgrounds, representing every region in Canada, fought for the values we hold so dear: freedom, democracy, and peace.  In the words of one veteran: ‘We went up Vimy Ridge as Albertans and Nova Scotians.  We came down as Canadians. ’Today, as we gather to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge, we remember the thousands of Canadians who gave their lives far from Canada’s shores.  We pay tribute to the 100th anniversary of a pivotal battle that has left an indelible mark on our history.  And we thank every Canadian who has answered the call to serve for their selflessness and sacrifice.  Lest we forget. I am shocked and saddened that so many people were killed in today’s bombings in Egypt at St.  George’s Church in Tanta and St.  Mark’s Cathedral in Alexandria. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the families and friends of the victims of these heinous acts.  Our thoughts and prayers are with all those affected, and we hope and pray that those injured have a complete and rapid recovery. Today’s senseless attacks targeted churchgoers attending Palm Sunday services, which mark the Sunday before Easter and the start of Holy Week for Christians.  Let us remember that the palm branches used in services around the world today are a symbol of peace. Canada stands shoulder-to-shoulder with Egypt and the Egyptian people, and we offer our full assistance to the Government of Egypt in this difficult time. Far too often, religious groups around the world suffer persecution and discrimination at the hands of violent extremists.  Canada strongly condemns these cowardly acts of terrorism.  As an international community, we must stand united in our efforts to stop those responsible and to fight against hate by embracing the values of diversity, inclusion and peace. Tonight at sundown, Jewish communities across Canada and around the world will observe the beginning of Passover. The eight-day festival celebrates the liberation of the Israelites from slavery in ancient Egypt.  It is a time to reaffirm our commitment to face fear with hope, to choose unity over division, and to have faith in the better days that lie ahead. The Passover story of redemption – of a people’s triumph over even the deepest bondage and oppression – reminds us to look to each other for strength and hope. Today, we celebrate the strength and perseverance of the Jewish people, who have survived and triumphed over unspeakable persecution.  We reaffirm our commitment to stand against anti-Semitism and other forms of hatred and discrimination, and to work together to make our world a better place for all. This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Jewish Canadians have made enormous contributions to Canada and have helped make it the strong and diverse country it is today. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I offer our best wishes to all those observing Passover in Canada and around the world.  Chag Pesach Sameach!This week, Sikhs in Canada and around the world will celebrate Vaisakhi, a festival that marks the most important date in the Sikh faith. Vaisakhi celebrates the founding in 1699 of the Khalsa – the community of baptized Sikhs – by Guru Gobind Singh Ji.  Family and friends will gather to pray at Gurdwaras and to participate in Khalsa Day parades. Next week, we will mark the 35th anniversary of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  Just as the creation of the Khalsa defines Sikhism, the Charter defines our country.  It defends our individual rights and freedoms and, for Canadians of Sikh faith, ensures the Five Ks are protected. This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Canada is proud to be home to one of the largest Sikh populations in the world.  Sikh Canadians help make Canada the strong and diverse country it is today. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating a joyful Vaisakhi. Waheguru Ji Ka Khalsa, Waheguru Ji Ki Fateh. Today, Tamils in Canada and around the world will welcome the New Year, known as Puthandu. On this occasion, families and friends will come together to feast, celebrate, and visit holy sites in a spirit of hope and optimism for the year to come. This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Our country is stronger and richer because of the contributions of Tamil Canadians. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a peaceful, joyous and healthy New Year. Iniya Tamizh Puthandu Nalvazhthukkal. This weekend, millions of Canadians and people around the world will gather with friends and family to celebrate the Easter holiday.  This year is special, as Christians in both the Eastern and Western churches are celebrating Easter on the same day. Easter, also known as Pascha, is a sacred time of year in the Christian tradition, and celebrates Jesus Christ’s resurrection and triumph over death. The Easter story reminds us of the sacrifices made for us, and of the forgiving power of compassion.  It is also a call to hope, especially when hope feels most impossible. This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Christian Canadians of all backgrounds help make Canada the strong, diverse, and inclusive country it is today. As we gather with those most important to us, let us put into practice what it truly means to love our neighbours as ourselves, and do what we can to make the world a more just, compassionate, and peaceful place for all. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a blessed and joyful Easter.  We hope all Canadians, no matter their faith, find this a time of renewal and promise. For the past 35 years, the Charter has helped build a country where people from all over the world can come together as equals and create opportunities for one another. The Charter protects the rights and freedoms that are essential to our identity as Canadians.  It allows us to express ourselves as individuals and to celebrate our differences, while bringing us closer as a country. This year, we also mark the 35th anniversary of Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, which recognizes and affirms Aboriginal and treaty rights.  There is no relationship more important to our government than the one with Indigenous Peoples.  We are committed to a renewed nation-to-nation, Inuit-to-Crown, and government-to-government relationship based on recognition of rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership. The spirit and substance of the Charter are at the heart of Canada’s success, and should inspire us all as we work toward a fairer, more just and compassionate society. Today, I remind Canadians that we have no task greater than to stand on guard for one another’s liberties.  The words enshrined in the Charter are our rights, freedoms, and – above all – our collective responsibility.   Today, Canadians join people across the Commonwealth and around the world to celebrate the 91st birthday of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada. For 65 years, Her Majesty has served the Commonwealth and its people with grace, strength, and devotion.  Earlier this year, we were honoured to celebrate Her Majesty’s Sapphire Jubilee.  She is Canada’s first monarch to celebrate 65 years on the throne. Over the years, Her Majesty has been a constant presence in the life of Canada.  She has undertaken 22 official tours to our country and served as the patron of numerous charities, initiatives, and military units. Today, we pay tribute to Her Majesty’s enduring service to the Commonwealth and its people.  May her dedication and sense of duty inspire us all. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish Her Majesty a very happy birthday and continued health and happiness in the years to come. Today, we join the global community to celebrate Earth Day – a time to connect with nature and reaffirm our commitment to build a cleaner, more sustainable world for our children. As Canadians, we have a responsibility to safeguard our planet and natural treasures.  I am proud of the steps our Government has taken to protect the environment and promote clean growth.  These steps include historic domestic and international agreements that will help us respond to pressing environmental challenges, grow the economy, and build a cleaner, healthier tomorrow. On Earth Day, we recognize Indigenous cultures that have long understood the intricate links that exist between land, water, air, and all living things.  Ensuring that decisions today serve generations tomorrow requires an active effort from all of us. Canada looks forward to hosting World Environment Day on June 5 this year.  Like Earth Day, it will be an occasion to celebrate our connections to our environment and to each other. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to take a moment today to go outside, find renewal in nature, and appreciate the environment that connects us all. Every year, almost 13 million Canadians across the country volunteer their time, energy, and talent to help improve the well-being of others and make Canada an even greater place to live. National Volunteer Week is a time to celebrate Canadian volunteers and thank them for the selfless work they do to help those around them.  As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation in 2017, we honour the essential contributions volunteers make to our country, this week and throughout the year. This year’s theme –Volunteering, eh? How do you recognize volunteering in 2017? –encourages us to celebrate the many acts of generosity that Canadians carry out each day.  Whether cleaning up our shorelines, tutoring young people after school, or preparing a meal for Canadians in need, volunteers remind us that our commitment to support each other makes us who we are as a country. The Government of Canada is proud to honour the contributions of these exceptional individuals through Canada’s Volunteer Awards.  Canada’s communities are stronger and more inclusive thanks to the efforts and dedication of our countless volunteers. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to take the time this week to thank a volunteer who is making a difference in your community by using the hashtags #MakeADifference and #NVW2017. At sundown tonight, Jewish communities and others in Canada and around the world will unite to commemorate the lives of the six million Jews who were systematically murdered by the Nazis during the Holocaust. Memorial candles will be lit to honour victims and survivors.  The Mourner’s Kaddish will be repeated, reaffirming the commitment of the Jewish people to God in the face of tragedy. The atrocities carried out during the Holocaust have caused some people to ask whether it is possible to still have faith in humanity.  Yom HaShoah teaches us that we must maintain that faith.  To honour the victims of the Holocaust is to recognize their humanity, which no human act can erase. At Auschwitz this year, participants in the March of the Living will walk in silence as a testament to the resilience of the survivors of the Holocaust.  In Israel, a whole nation will pause as air raid sirens sound in remembrance.  Here in Canada, events across the country will be held to commemorate those who perished, and to honour the survivors, and those who risked their lives to save others. Today, I call on all Canadians to guard against a resurgence of anti-Semitism and racism, and to fight all forms of hatred and discrimination, whenever and wherever they occur.  It is up to all of us to bring meaning to the solemn vow: ‘Never again. ’On behalf of the Government of Canada, I extend our thoughts and prayers to all those observing Yom HaShoah. Every year on this day, we join people in many countries around the world to honour and remember workers who have been killed, injured, or suffered illness because of workplace hazards and accidents. Unfortunately, not all workplaces are safe, and some jobs require people to put themselves in harm’s way.  Each year in Canada, thousands of employees suffer workplace-related illnesses, are injured, or lose their lives while on the job.  Workplace hazards can affect not only workers themselves, but also their families and communities. Next month, we will mark the 25th anniversary of the Westray mine disaster.  In remembering that terrible day, our government commits to working to ensure the Westray Law is applied effectively, and negligent employers are held responsible. The Government of Canada is committed to the health, safety, and wellbeing of all workers across the country.  We will continue to work closely with organized labour, employers, employees, stakeholders, and provincial and territorial partners to educate and raise awareness about work-related dangers, and to help prevent accidents, injuries, and illnesses in the workplace.  Part of this commitment includes our pledge to ban the manufacturing, importing, exporting and use of asbestos in Canada by 2018. On this sombre day, I encourage all Canadians to take a moment to pause and honour those workers who have lost their lives, been injured, disabled, or became sick while on the job.  Together, let us renew our commitment to making Canada a healthier and safer place to work and live. This week, I encourage all Canadians to #GetLoud to raise awareness about mental health, an important, but sometimes invisible, aspect of our general health. This year’s campaign, led by the Canadian Mental Health Association, asks us to speak up to make sure Canadians get the mental health care they need, when they need it.  Mental health is a core part of our well-being, but too often long wait times or limited services stop Canadians from getting the mental health care they need. That is why the Government of Canada will provide $5 billion over the next 10 years to provinces and territories to support mental health initiatives.  These investments will help improve access to evidence-based interventions and mental health services and care for people across the country.  With a particular focus on youth and young adults, this will help as many as 500,000 young Canadians. We also know that providing greater access to care and support is just half of the equation.  Having access to safe, adequate and affordable housing, and being able to find and keep a good paying job are also part of what makes a difference in people’s health.  That is why the Government of Canada is making major investments in both housing and employment initiatives.  As part of the new $5 billion National Housing Fund, persons with mental health and addiction issues will receive greater support. The Government of Canada remains committed to help communities address their unique mental health challenges.  To build on Indigenous-led initiatives like the First Nations Mental Wellness Continuum Framework and the National Inuit Suicide Prevention Strategy, Budget 2017 pledges over $200 million over the next five years to increase support for mental health services for First Nations and Inuit.  This includes making available, for the first time, the services of traditional healers as part of the Non-Insured Health Benefits Program administered by Health Canada. The struggles of mental illness have affected so many of us, including my own family.  For everyone who has struggled with a mental illness: thank you for sharing your stories, and for showing that being open is a strength.  You are not alone.  Today, I join Canadians to celebrate your resilience, and to get loud about the need for timely access to mental health services and support.  Together, we can make sure all Canadians have the care and support they need to live full and healthy lives. Today, we join our Israeli friends and Jewish communities in Canada and around the world to celebrate the 69th anniversary of the founding of the State of Israel. Canada was one of the first countries to officially recognize Israel, and we are proud to call Israel our partner and call Israelis our friends. Canada and Israel are closely linked in heart and in mind by common democratic values and close people-to-people connections.  These provide the foundation of an expanding bilateral relationship, which includes ongoing efforts to promote peace and stability in the Middle East. Today, while we celebrate Israel’s independence, we also reaffirm our commitment to fight anti-Semitism and anti-Zionism.  Israel and its people continue to face threats throughout the world, including here in Canada.  We stand on guard against a resurgence of anti-Semitism, hate, and discrimination in all its forms. On this Independence Day, I am proud to renew Canada’s commitment to a safe and secure homeland for the Jewish people, and to a lasting peace between all peoples in the Middle East. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating Israel Independence Day a Yom Ha’atzmaut Sameach. Shalom. Every year, on May 3rd, we celebrate the fundamental principle of freedom of the press, and the important role journalists play in promoting democracy around the world.  On this day, we take a hard look at the current state of press freedom, and pay tribute to journalists who have lost their lives in the pursuit of truth. The theme of this year’s World Press Freedom Day is ‘Critical Minds for Critical Times: Media’s role in advancing peaceful, just and inclusive societies. ’ It reminds us that peace, justice and inclusiveness are foundational values for any society that empowers individual citizens and promotes government transparency and accountability. The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms – now in its 35th year – established the freedom of the press as a fundamental freedom.  Journalists start conversations, shine light on stories that would otherwise not be told, and give Canadians the facts they need to engage in public debate and shape events around them.  A free and open press is crucial to an informed and engaged citizenry, which is at the heart of a healthy democracy. While journalistic freedom is widely recognized and respected in Canada, we cannot ignore the censorship, intimidation, false arrests and violence that many journalists face in other parts of the world.  These acts give rise to fear and self-censorship, stifle societies, and undermine the right to freedom of expression.  Canada will continue working to promote a vibrant and free press here and abroad. Today, we recognize the many journalists who seek out the truth, challenge assumptions and expose injustices, often at great personal risk.  They are the cornerstones of any strong and healthy democracy, informing and challenging us all to think more critically about the world around us. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to congratulate Emmanuel Macron on his election as the next President of France. Canada and France share a warm and historic relationship, rooted in our common history, deep cultural ties, people-to-people connections, and strong economic partnership.  We also closely collaborate on important international issues as strong allies and partners with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, G7, G20 and La Francophonie. I look forward to working closely with President-elect Macron in the years ahead as we work together on a progressive agenda to promote international security, increase collaboration in science and technology, and create good, middle class jobs on both sides of the Atlantic.  This also includes implementing the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement. On behalf of all Canadians, I would like to congratulate Mr.  Moon Jae-in on his election as the next President of the Republic of Korea. Canada and the Republic of Korea enjoy a close relationship, based on our strategic partnership, a modern free-trade agreement and common values.  We look forward to expanding cooperation based on our recently signed Canada-Korea Science, Technology and Innovation Agreement.  Canada also collaborates with the Republic of Korea on important international issues as strong partners in the G20, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. I look forward to working with President Moon to deepen relations between our two countries. Canada remains steadfast in its support of the Republic of Korea and will continue to work with our international partners to enhance peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region, including on the Korean Peninsula. Today, Buddhists in Canada and around the world will celebrate Vesak, the most important of the Buddhist festivals.  Vesak is a time when Buddhists come together to reflect on the birth, enlightenment and passing of Gautama Buddha, the founder of Buddhism. Around the world, Buddhists will visit their local temples to pray, and to offer gifts to show respect and gratitude to the Buddha for his life and wisdom. This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I encourage all Canadians to reflect on the Buddha’s universal teachings of peace, selfless service, and showing compassion toward others, especially those in need.  These shared values unite us as Canadians, and are at the heart of Canada’s success. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I offer our best wishes to all those observing this sacred day. Three hundred and seventy-five years ago today, French colonists led by Paul de Chomedey, Sieur de Maisonneuve, and Jeanne Mance established the fur trade settlement of Ville-Marie.  Centuries later, we celebrate this major anniversary for the diverse and thriving Montréal we know today. The fourth largest Francophone city in the world, Montréal is a hallmark of the central role Canada’s Francophone community has played, and continues to play, in building our country.  We honour the foundational contributions the French-speaking community has made to Canada, and we celebrate Montréal as a dynamic economic and cultural hub. We also recognize the Indigenous People who originally inhabited this island and knew it by its Indigenous name, Hochelaga.  Thanks in great part to its Francophone and Indigenous roots, Montréal represents the best of Canada’s openness, diversity, and inclusiveness.  Today, Montréal is home to people from all over the world who speak different languages, practice different religions, and represent different cultures.  This diversity sets the city apart as an example of pluralism for the rest of the world. The former host of EXPO 67 and the 1976 Olympics, Montréal is the birthplace of the Just for Laughs Festival and the Cirque du Soleil.  This city is home to an incredible arts scene, world class educational institutions, a large business community, diverse and world-renowned cuisine, and a rich sports legacy – most notably the Montréal Canadiens, winners of a record 24 Stanley Cups.  The people who have called Montréal home are artists, inventors, Nobel laureates, world-class athletes, musicians, activists, and entrepreneurs – all of whom have shaped Canada and the world. As both a proud Montrealer and a Member of Parliament representing other Montrealers, I am happy and honoured to celebrate this important anniversary for my hometown.  On behalf of all Canadians, bravo Montréal!Today marks #IDAHOT – the International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia. No matter who we love or how we identify, all of us deserve to feel safe and secure, live free from discrimination and persecution, and express ourselves fully.  Today – and every day – I join Canadians to support gender expression, gender identity and sexual orientation rights for people in Canada and around the world, and to challenge stigma, violence, and prejudices wherever they occur. Through measures including Bills C-16 and C-39 – and with the help of Member of Parliament Randy Boissonnault, Special Advisor on LGBTQ2 issues – our Government continues to work to make sure transgender and other gender-diverse people, as well as people of diverse sexual orientations, can live freely and fully according to their identity.  Canada will seek to co-chair the Equal Rights Coalition, to provide leadership within the new inter-governmental network to protect and promote the rights of lesbian, gay, transgender, and intersex people around the world. In Canada and around the world, we must continue to fight against homophobia, transphobia, and biphobia, and to defend gender expression, gender identity and sexual orientation rights.  We deplore the recent, reprehensible reports of violations of the human rights of gay and bisexual men in Chechnya.  We call for the protection of all people in Chechnya whose sexual orientation makes them a target for persecution.  Human rights have no borders. Today, I ask Canadians and people around the world to fight hatred, honour love, and defend human rights for everyone.  Together, we can build a world where all of us are free to be who we are and love who we love. Today, we mark the eighth anniversary of the end of the war in Sri Lanka.  I extend my deepest sympathies to those who were affected and their families, as we solemnly reflect and honour the lives that were lost during this 26 year war. As we remember the trauma and loss, we must continue to work to heal the wounds of all those who have suffered, and to achieve long-term reconciliation and peace in the country. I reiterate my call to the Government of Sri Lanka to ensure that a process of accountability is established that will have the trust and confidence of the victims of this war.  To this end, Sri Lanka should fulfill its international commitments by ensuring the involvement of Commonwealth and international investigators, prosecutors and judges.    I extend my deepest sympathy and support to Canadians of Tamil descent.  As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, we recognize the contributions Tamil-Canadians have made to Canada and the adversity that they have overcome. I was devastated when I heard about the innocent victims who were killed or injured at the Ariana Grande concert tonight in Manchester – many of them far too young. On behalf of all Canadians, our deepest condolences go out to the families and friends of those who were killed.  We also wish a speedy recovery to everyone who was injured. Canada and the United Kingdom are the closest of friends, and we stand together as a people in this most tragic of circumstances. With our allies and partners, we will continue to counter such senseless acts and to fight terrorism in its many forms.  We will do all that we can to assist British authorities in bringing those responsible to justice. Our hearts are with the people of the United Kingdom tonight, and we mourn with them the loss of so many innocent victims. More than a century ago today, a great injustice took place when most of the 376 passengers onboard the Komagata Maru steamship were denied entry into Canada and forced to return to India where some were killed and many imprisoned. Last year, I stood in the House of Commons to apologize on behalf of the Government of Canada to all those affected by this tragic incident.  An unjust federal law ultimately led to these passengers being turned away.  For that grave injustice and for the regrettable consequences that followed, we are sorry. The Komagata Maru passengers share much in common with the many immigrants, past and present, who have come to Canada to build a better life for themselves and their families.  By offering compassion and a fair chance at success, we not only help provide more opportunities for them and their loved ones, we also build a better Canada – one that is stronger, more inclusive, and more prosperous. Today, we honour the victims of the Komagata Maru tragedy and their descendants.  Canadians are proud to be part of a country that respects and protects multiculturalism as a core and defining value, and we thank all those from the South Asian community who make such invaluable contributions to our society.  We benefit greatly from the vibrant diversity of our country. I was appalled and angered to learn of the vicious attack earlier today on Coptic Christians travelling to the monastery of Saint Samuel the Confessor in Egypt’s Minya governate. On behalf of Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to everyone who has lost loved ones because of these heinous acts.  We also hope and pray that those injured have a safe, complete and rapid recovery. This is the third major attack on Egypt’s Coptic Christian community in less than two months, a community already reeling from years of discrimination and violence.  Today’s victims included women and many children heading to the monastery for worship, as well as workmen serving there as gardeners and builders. In this troubling time, the people of Egypt can count on Canada’s friendship and support, and we offer our full assistance to the Government of Egypt. As recent events show, violent extremists often target those most vulnerable.  As members of the international community, we must continue to stand against those responsible for these acts of terrorism and counter hate by promoting the values of diversity, inclusion and peace. Tonight at sunset, Muslims in Canada and around the world will mark the start of Ramadan. Ramadan is a sacred time of the year for the Muslim community, and commemorates the revealing of the Qur'an to Prophet Muhammad.  The month-long journey of fasting and prayer encourages spiritual growth, reflection, and compassion for those who are less fortunate. Ramadan is also a time of community, when Muslims gather with family and friends to pray and share iftar, the evening meal.  For all of us, Ramadan is a reminder to appreciate the many gifts we are given, and to give generously to others, in our communities and around the world. This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Muslim Canadians help make Canada the strong, diverse, and inclusive country it is today. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to Muslim communities here in Canada and around the world. Ramadan Mubarak!Today, we honour the brave United Nations (UN) peacekeepers who work selflessly to provide safety and security for people around the world.  We also pay tribute to the over 3,500 UN peacekeepers – including 122 Canadians – who have died in the service of peace. The women and men who serve as UN peacekeepers protect people from the worst effects of war – and set the stage for peace.  They protect civilians, monitor ceasefires, help combatants disarm, and support peace processes as groups move forward after conflict.  Peacekeepers work at the centre of many tense and dangerous situations, often endangering their own lives to help those most in need. Our country has a long and proud history of peacekeeping.  Lester B.  Pearson, Canada’s fourteenth Prime Minister and then Secretary of State for External Affairs, proposed the first large-scale UN peacekeeping mission during the 1956 Suez Crisis.  For his commitment to a peaceful resolution to the crisis, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1957. Sixty years later, Canada will host the 2017 UN Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial as we continue to work with our international partners to strengthen peacekeeping efforts. Peacekeeping embodies Canada’s commitment to the protection of human rights and the empowerment of women and girls.  We must ensure women’s voices and experiences are represented in peace processes.  There cannot be lasting peace without women. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank UN peacekeepers past and present who have dedicated themselves to advance peace and human rights around the world.  Their bravery represents humanity at its most selfless.  We will continue to work closely with the UN to support peacekeeping operations. Nova Scotians have chosen to re-elect a majority government led by the Nova Scotia Liberal Party. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I offer my sincere congratulations to Stephen McNeil who continues to have the honour and privilege to serve as Premier. I look forward to continuing to work closely with the provincial government to create middle class jobs through the Atlantic Growth Strategy, as well as to promote the well-being of Indigenous Peoples, and safeguard Nova Scotia’s clean air and water. By working closely together, we will grow the industries and sectors at the heart of the province’s prosperity, promote clean growth, and protect our environment for generations to come. We are deeply disappointed that the United States federal government has decided to withdraw from the Paris Agreement.  Canada is unwavering in our commitment to fight climate change and support clean economic growth.  Canadians know we need to take decisive and collective action to tackle the many harsh realities of our changing climate. While the U. S.  decision is disheartening, we remain inspired by the growing momentum around the world to combat climate change and transition to clean growth economies.  We are proud that Canada stands united with all the other parties that support the Agreement.  We will continue to work with our domestic and international partners to drive progress on one of the greatest challenges we face as a world. This is not only about the huge economic opportunities of clean growth and the need to address the pressing threats of climate change.  This is about an ambitious and unshakeable desire to leave a cleaner, healthier and more sustainable planet for our kids and for generations to come. We are all custodians of this world, and that is why Canada will continue to work with the U. S.  at the state level, and with other U. S.  stakeholders, to address climate change and promote clean growth.  We will also continue to reach out to the U. S.  federal government to discuss this matter of critical importance for all humankind, and to identify areas of shared interest for collaboration, including on emissions reductions. Canada strongly condemns the senseless attack that took place last night in London, United Kingdom, which killed and injured many innocent people.  I am heartbroken that a Canadian is among those killed. We grieve with the families and friends of those who have lost loved ones, and wish all those injured a speedy and full recovery. Londoners and people across the United Kingdom have always displayed strength and resilience in the face of adversity.  We recently witnessed this after the attacks in Manchester and in the Westminster area of London.  This time will be no different. These hateful acts do not deter us; they only strengthen our resolve.  Canadians stand united with the British people.  We will continue to work together with the United Kingdom and all our allies to fight terrorism and bring perpetrators to justice. The Government of Canada will not comment further at this time out of respect for the family. Today, on Canadian Armed Forces Day, we thank the soldiers, sailors, airmen and airwomen who courageously defend our country’s fundamental values and interests, protect North America, and contribute to international peace and security. Whether on military operations, peace missions, or during disaster relief responses, the brave men and women of our military always answer the call with pride, dedication and professionalism.  In recent years, this has included responding to floods and wildfires, and welcoming more than 25,000 Syrian refugees to Canada.  They have also participated in the global coalition against Daesh, and helped train Ukrainian Armed Forces. On this day, we also remember the dedicated members of our Armed Forces who have lost their lives serving our country.  We owe them and their families an immeasurable debt of gratitude for their sacrifice. This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us honour our brave service men and women, who continue to defend the Canadian values of peace, freedom and democracy around the world. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I join with all Canadians to extend our most sincere thanks to past and present members of the Canadian Armed Forces – and their families – for their unwavering service.  We honour all they do to keep the peace and protect our freedom. Today, we join the global community to celebrate World Environment Day – an opportunity to connect with nature and to recommit ourselves to build a cleaner, more sustainable world for generations to come.  This year, Canada will host the official global celebrations for the first time.  We are proud to celebrate our shared environment, and to work with our partners around the world to leave a cleaner, healthier planet for all our children. The theme for this year’s World Environment Day, ‘Connecting People to Nature,’ encourages us to get outdoors, appreciate the healthy ecosystems that contribute to our well-being, and do our part to protect the planet we share. World Environment Day reminds us that we have a global responsibility to safeguard our environment – and that each of us has a role to play to preserve and protect it.  More than ever, Canada is committed to provide international leadership to fight climate change and support clean economic growth.  We will continue to work with our domestic and international partners to drive progress on the environmental challenges we face as a global community. Canada has taken strong steps to protect the environment and promote clean economic growth.  We adopted the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, launched the Oceans Protection Plan, and continue to support developing countries in mitigating and adapting to climate change.  Despite this progress, we have much more work to do.  Our Government is committed to work with people around the world and at home, including young people and Indigenous Peoples, to find concrete, effective solutions to environmental issues. Today, I ask all Canadians and everyone around the world to remember we share one planet.  Climate change does not recognize borders, and few challenges have ever been so global in scale.  Our children's future depends on our immediate and collective response. Every day, Canada’s public servants work hard to strengthen the middle class, deliver services to Canadians, and help tackle the challenges we face as a country. Over the past year, federal public servants have negotiated international trade agreements, responded to the wildfire in Fort McMurray and the flooding that struck many communities, and helped Syrian refugees resettle here, in their new country.  No matter the challenge, they rise to the occasion, and put the needs of Canadians at the centre of all they do. At the same time, public servants have experienced many hardships caused by the implementation of the Phoenix pay system.  This problem is unacceptable, and we are working tirelessly to make sure every employee gets the pay they are owed. This year’s theme is ‘Proudly Serving Canadians for 150 years’.  As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, we honour the tremendous work of our federal public servants and their important contributions to building our nation. With passion, professionalism, and an unwavering commitment to Canadians, federal public servants often go above and beyond in their work in all regions of the country.  They play a vital role in our democracy, and have become the envy of governments around the world. As we look ahead to the next 150 years, we remain committed to a world-class Public Service that is modern, efficient, and reflects the diversity of the people and country it serves. To federal public servants, I say thank you.  You play an integral role in our society, and your hard work and dedication benefit us all.  I look forward to continuing to work with you to strengthen the middle class and build a Canada where everyone has a chance to succeed. The Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, today issued the following statement on Philippine Independence Day:Today, we join the Filipino community in Canada, in the Philippines, and around the world in celebrating the 119th anniversary of Philippine Independence. More than 700,000 Canadians trace their heritage to the Philippines.  Canada looks forward to continue working with the Philippines on bilateral and global issues, including peace and security, good governance and development cooperation. Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride.  This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us recognize the important contributions of the Filipino-Canadian community to our national fabric. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish all those celebrating today a happy Independence Day. Maligayang araw ng kalayaan!Mabuhay!Today, we mourn the passing of Helmut Kohl, who served as Chancellor of Germany from 1982 to 1998. Mr.  Kohl believed in cooperation and reconciliation, and was driven by a vision of a unified, modern Germany.  Within a year of the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, this dream was realized with the reunification of East and West Germany and the first free, universal election in the country in almost 60 years. His calls for unity did not stop at the German border.  Mr.  Kohl also advocated for a political and economic union within Europe.  He spearheaded the Maastricht Treaty, which led to the current European Union and the single European currency. I have fond memories of meeting Mr.  Kohl when I was a child.  Many Germans will be mourning his passage today.  I mourn alongside them. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our condolences to the family and friends of Mr.  Kohl, the German people, and all who admired his tireless efforts in favour of unity and cooperation.  On World Refugee Day, we honour the strength and resilience of the millions of people around the world fleeing conflict, insecurity, and persecution.  We solemnly acknowledge the hardships they face, celebrate the significant contributions they make to our communities, and recognize the dedication of those who help them. Today, over 65 million people are displaced around the world, and more than 22 million of them are refugees.  They flee unlivable situations in their homelands, crossing deserts and seas to escape, and carrying dreams of a new life even as they struggle with intense loss.  These hardships particularly affect women, who bear different and disproportionate effects of conflict and insecurity. Canadians are fortunate to live in a country shaped, over the centuries, by the dreams and hard work of millions of immigrants and refugees.  Today, we recognize their dignity and potential.  Despite the hardships they face, these individuals make many contributions to shape the diverse, strong, and prosperous country Canada is today. Canada has a long tradition of welcoming refugees, and today, Canadians continue to help newcomers establish their lives here with compassion and openness.  In recent years, communities across the country have welcomed over 40,000 Syrian refugees.  Their generosity illustrates the spirit of compassion that defines us as Canadians.  When we embrace our differences and come together to welcome newcomers, we strengthen our communities in enduring ways. Rising conflict, insecurity, and persecution today have led to migration levels not seen since the Second World War.  We have a global responsibility to respond to this crisis and to support those who are forced to leave home.  We must address the root causes of forced migration by seeking diplomatic solutions for violent conflicts and standing united in the fight against terrorism.  We must also redouble our efforts on climate change, so that it does not further exacerbate insecurity in the world. Today, I call on Canadians and people around the world to stand with people seeking shelter from enormous hardship and violence.  Refugees are forced to leave home, but they carry with them dreams for their children and the hope of creating a better world.  Let us show compassion for their plight, recognize their dignity, and continue to see ourselves in each other. Over twenty years ago, the Government of Canada, together with Indigenous organizations, designated this day – the summer solstice – as National Aboriginal Day. Every year, we join together on this day to recognize the fundamental contributions that First Nations, Inuit, and the Métis Nation have made to the identity and culture of all Canadians.  The history, art, traditions, and cultures of Indigenous Peoples have shaped our past, and continue to shape who we are today. No relationship is more important to Canada than the relationship with Indigenous Peoples.  Our Government is working together with Indigenous Peoples to build a nation-to-nation, Inuit-Crown, government-to-government relationship – one based on respect, partnership, and recognition of rights. We are determined to make a real difference in the lives of Indigenous Peoples – by closing socio-economic gaps, supporting greater self-determination, and establishing opportunities to work together on shared priorities.  We are also reviewing all federal laws and policies that concern Indigenous Peoples and making progress on the Calls to Action outlined in the Final Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish everyone a happy National Aboriginal Day.  I invite all Canadians to take part in the #NADCanada activities in their community and to learn about the history, cultures and traditions of Indigenous Peoples.  The 150th anniversary of Confederation this year reminds us of the legacy of the past.  As we look forward to the next 150 years, we commit to move ahead together in a spirit of reconciliation and respect. This year, I am also pleased to announce that from here forward the Government’s intention is to rename this day National Indigenous Peoples Day. Last year, we raised taxes on the wealthiest one per cent so we could cut taxes for the middle class.  We put more money in the pockets of nine out of ten families through the Canada Child Benefit, and strengthened the Canada Pension Plan so more Canadians can achieve a strong, secure, and stable retirement.  In 2017, we have built on these accomplishments, and taken further steps to create good, middle class jobs while growing the economy over the long term. Between February and June, I signed agreements with the leaders of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, the Assembly of First Nations, and the Métis National Council, establishing a process to advance shared priorities for Inuit, First Nations, and the Métis Nation. In February, I welcomed the European Parliament’s approval of the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) between Canada and the European Union.  CETA is a gold-standard agreement that will give consumers more choice, make it easier and less costly for businesses to compete, and create good, middle class jobs on both sides of the Atlantic. In March, Minister Morneau tabled one of the most forward-looking budgets in Canada’s history.  With its strong focus on innovation and skills, Budget 2017 prepares Canadians for the changing economy and secures Canada’s place as a hub of innovation. Budget 2017 makes significant investments in public transit systems, which will result in shorter commute times, less air pollution, and more efficient, better integrated transit.  It also invests $11. 2 billion in affordable housing to make sure all families have access to a safe and affordable place to live.  Budget 2017 is the first federal budget ever to include a gender-based statement, which looks at the ways our policies and investments affect women and men differently. In April, we introduced a bill to legalize, strictly regulate, and restrict access to cannabis no later than July 2018.  Our legislation will, for the first time, make it a specific criminal offence to sell cannabis to a minor and create significant penalties for those who engage young Canadians in cannabis-related offences. In May, we unveiled tax relief measures for deployed Canadian Armed Forces personnel and police officers.  We also introduced Bill C-48, the Oil Tanker Moratorium Act, and kept our promise to put a moratorium on crude oil tanker shipping on British Columbia’s north coast.  At the end of the month, we announced that Canada will host the 2018 G7 Summit in Charlevoix, Quebec. On June 6, Minister Freeland outlined a new foreign policy for Canada, and underscored our commitment to a rules-based international order, progressive trade policies, gender equality, and fighting climate change.  The next day, Minister Sajjan unveiled Canada’s new defence policy, which establishes a credible, realistic, and funded strategy for our military and, most importantly, will deliver the standard of service and care our women and men in uniform deserve. A few days later, Minister Bibeau launched Canada’s new Feminist International Assistance Policy.  This vision focuses Canada’s international assistance on the empowerment of women and girls, and positions Canada as a leader on gender equality in aid programming.  Minister Duclos also announced the Multilateral Early Learning and Child Care Framework, which will ensure more Canadian families have access to affordable,high-quality, and inclusive child care. This month, we announced that we will introduce legislation to make it possible to erase the convictions for Canadians who were found guilty of consensual sexual activity with a same sex partner under historical, unjust laws.  Three important pieces of government legislation passed Parliament: Bill C-4, which restores a fair and balanced approach to labour relations; Bill C-6, which ends second-class citizenship and makes it easier for hardworking immigrants to become citizens; and Bill C-16, which ensures the full protection of transgender people across Canada. Earlier this week, Minister Goodale tabled legislation to create a new National Security and Intelligence Review Agency and introduce changes to Bill C-51, which will strengthen security and better protect Canadians’ rights. We have made real progress in helping the middle class and those working hard to join it.  Since December 2015, Canada’s unemployment rate has dropped from 7. 1 per cent to 6. 6 per cent.  In the last year, the Canadian economy has created over 300,000 new jobs.  We still have plenty of work to do, but as we get ready to celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I am confident that Canada’s best days lie ahead. Today, we remember the largest mass murder and terrorist act in Canada’s history.  On this day, 32 years ago, 329 innocent people – citizens of Canada, Britain, the United States and India – were killed by a terrorist’s bomb while travelling on Air India Flight 182.  This appalling and cowardly act left families and friends grieving the loss of loved ones, and shook our country to its core.  Since that day, we have lost hundreds more Canadians to terrorist acts in our country and around the world. This past year, a Canadian mother was killed and her son injured in a terrorist attack in Jordan.  Two young Canadian women were also killed – one in a New Year’s Day attack in Turkey, and one less than a month ago in London. Here in Canada, we grieved with the people of Ste-Foy, Quebec, after six men – fathers, brothers, uncles – were killed during a shooting at the Centre culturel islamique de Québec.  The attack sought to instill fear and divide Canadians against themselves.  Instead, Canadians came together. Our best response is to deepen our resolve to uphold democratic values of pluralism, diversity, and inclusiveness.   We are a welcoming and generous country, and know that diversity and openness to the world are sources of strength.  They have made Canada not only more prosperous, but safer and more united. Canada condemns all forms of terrorism, from any source.  We will continue to work closely with our allies, and the international community, to prevent radicalization and fight terrorism both at home and abroad.  We will always promote and defend human rights, justice, and equality – values that are vital tools in the fight against intolerance, hatred, and fear. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I extend our deepest condolences to all who have experienced the pain and trauma of losing a loved one to terrorism.  We also thank those in the military, intelligence, and law enforcement communities in Canada and around the world who work, often at great personal risk, to keep us and our families safe.  Today, on la Fête nationale du Québec, Sophie and I join our fellow Quebecers to proudly celebrate the unique history and identity of Quebec.  As we gather with family and friends, we honour this proud and dynamic culture that makes Quebec prosper. On Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day, we also join Francophones across the country to celebrate our language, heritage and traditions. The French language and francophone culture are foundational to our country, and they continue to shape our values, our aspirations and our Canadian identity.  Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day is an opportunity for all of us to reflect on the essential contributions Francophones have made to build the diverse, strong and inclusive country that we all call home. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I offer our best wishes to Quebecers, Francophones and all those celebrating la Fête nationale du Québec and Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day. Tonight at sunset, Muslims in Canada and around the world will celebrate Eid al-Fitr,also known as the festival of breaking of the fast. Eid al-Fitr is one of the most important religious holidays for the Muslim community, and marks the end of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan.  It is a time to give thanks for the spiritual growth and the blessings received throughout the holy month. On this occasion, family and friends gather to attend special morning prayers, exchange greetings and gifts, share a celebratory meal, and give generously to others, especially those less fortunate. Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride.  This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, we recognize the invaluable contributions the Muslim community makes to our national fabric. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating Eid al-Fitr. Eid Mubarak!Today, Canadians from coast to coast to coast join together to celebrate the multiculturalism and openness that make us who we are as a country. Canadians come from every corner of the world, speak two official languages and hundreds more, practice many faiths, and represent many cultures.  Multiculturalism is at the heart of Canada’s heritage and identity – and as Canadians, we recognize that our differences make us strong. Canada’s strong tradition of multiculturalism has allowed our society to benefit from fresh perspectives and find new answers to old problems.  It has also helped Canada attract some of the most innovative and entrepreneurial people from around the world, showing that openness is the engine of both creativity and prosperity. This year, we mark both the 150th anniversary of Confederation and the 35th anniversary of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  These milestones remind us of the values that unite us – openness, inclusion, and deep respect for our differences.  Whoever we are, wherever we come from, these values bring us together as equal members of this great country. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a happy, fun, and educational Multiculturalism Day.  I invite Canadians to take part in the many activities happening across the country, and I ask all of us to work even harder to protect and promote multiculturalism.  Today, and every day, let us celebrate the differences that make Canada strong, diverse, inclusive, and proud. Under the leadership of John Horgan, the New Democratic Party will form government in British Columbia.  I look forward to working closely with Premier-designate Horgan to deliver real results on the issues that matter to British Columbians and to all Canadians. By coming together in a spirit of cooperation, I am confident that we can grow the industries and sectors at the heart of the province’s prosperity, while promoting clean growth and innovation and investing in public transit and green infrastructure. I also look forward to working with Premier-designate Horgan to implement the Calls to Action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, as we renew Canada’s nation-to-nation relationship with Indigenous Peoples.  I thank Christy Clark for her work as premier and her public service contributions to the province, the people of British Columbia, and the country as a whole. Today, we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation.  We come together as Canadians to celebrate the achievements of our great country, reflect on our past and present, and look boldly toward our future. Canada’s story stretches back long before Confederation, to the first people who worked, loved, and built their lives here, and to those who came here centuries later in search of a better life for their families.  In 1867, the vision of Sir George-Étienne Cartier and Sir John A.  Macdonald, among others, gave rise to Confederation – an early union, and one of the moments that have come to define Canada. In the 150 years since, we have continued to grow and define ourselves as a country.  We fought valiantly in two world wars, built the infrastructure that would connect us, and enshrined our dearest values – equality, diversity, freedom of the individual, and two official languages – in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  These moments, and many others, shaped Canada into the extraordinary country it is today – prosperous, generous, and proud. At the heart of Canada’s story are millions of ordinary people doing extraordinary things.  They exemplify what it means to be Canadian: ambitious aspirations, leadership driven by compassion, and the courage to dream boldly.  Whether we were born here or have chosen Canada as our home, this is who we are. Ours is a land of Indigenous Peoples, settlers, and newcomers, and our diversity has always been at the core of our success.  Canada’s history is built on countless instances of people uniting across their differences to work and thrive together.  We express ourselves in French, English, and hundreds of other languages, we practice many faiths, we experience life through different cultures, and yet we are one country.  Today, as has been the case for centuries, we are strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them. As we mark Canada 150, we also recognize that for many, today is not an occasion for celebration.  Indigenous Peoples in this country have faced oppression for centuries.  As a society, we must acknowledge and apologize for past wrongs, and chart a path forward for the next 150 years – one in which we continue to build our nation-to-nation, Inuit-Crown, and government-to-government relationship with the First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Nation. Our efforts toward reconciliation reflect a deep Canadian tradition – the belief that better is always possible.  Our job now is to ensure every Canadian has a real and fair chance at success.  We must create the right conditions so that the middle class, and those working hard to join it, can build a better life for themselves and their families. Great promise and responsibility await Canada.  As we look ahead to the next 150 years, we will continue to rise to the most pressing challenges we face, climate change among the first ones.  We will meet these challenges the way we always have – with hard work, determination, and hope. On the 150th anniversary of Confederation, we celebrate the millions of Canadians who have come together to make our country the strong, prosperous, and open place it is today.  On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish you and your loved ones a very happy Canada Day. On the 6th of July, we pause to remember the victims of the terrible tragedy that took place in Lac-Mégantic, Quebec, in 2013.  Just after midnight, a train carrying crude oil derailed and exploded in the heart of this community, taking with it the lives of 47 people in one of the worst rail disasters in Canadian history.  Our thoughts are with their families, and all those whose lives were changed that day. Four years later, this close-knit community continues to show profound resiliency in the face of the scars and trauma of those horrible events.  Lac-Mégantic is rebuilding itself once again into a beautiful, vibrant, and dynamic place to live, work, and visit.  No community should ever experience what Lac-Mégantic went through.  I am committed to ensuring that rail safety remains a top priority. To the people of Lac-Mégantic, please know that you remain in our thoughts and prayers and that you are present in every decision we make on this very important matter.  We will not let up on our commitment to make the railway system safer and better for communities like yours all across Canada. Shia Ismaili Muslims gather today in Canada and around the world to celebrate the diamond jubilee of their 49th hereditary Imam and spiritual leader, His Highness Prince Karim Aga Khan IV. Since becoming Imam in 1957, the Aga Khan has used his role to advance global humanitarian causes, helping to support sustainable development and poverty reduction projects and enhance civil society and education around the world. His spirit of cooperation also led the Aga Khan to establish, in 2006, the Global Centre for Pluralism, in partnership with the Government of Canada, and to choose Ottawa as its headquarters.  In recognition of his commitment to diversity and pluralism and his many humanitarian efforts on behalf of people around the world, the Government of Canada made His Highness an honorary Canadian citizen in 2009. On this day, I invite all Canadians to reflect on the Aga Khan’s example as he continues to inspire us to show compassion towards all those less fortunate than ourselves.  To all Ismaili Canadians celebrating the Diamond Jubilee, I wish all of you Khushali Mubarak!Between July 24 and 29, 1983, anti-Tamil pogroms were carried out in Colombo and other parts of Sri Lanka resulting in thousands of deaths and the displacement of countless victims. Today, we join Canadians of Tamil descent and members of the Tamil community to commemorate the 34th anniversary of the events of Black July. As we pause to reflect on the dark days of the Sri Lankan Civil War, we must continue to work to heal the wounds of all those who suffered.  Canada welcomes international efforts underway to achieve long-term reconciliation and peace for all Sri Lankans, but we reiterate the need to establish a process of accountability that will have the trust and the confidence of the victims of this war. Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride.  As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the time to recognize the contributions of all who have made Canada their home regardless of their cultural, religious or linguistic background. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I extend my deepest sympathy and support to all those who have suffered immeasurable loss during the Sri Lankan Civil War. Today, we remember the brave members of the army, navy and air forces who fought so valiantly, and sacrificed so greatly, during the Korean War. Sixty-four years ago today, a ceasefire put an end to active fighting in the Korean War.  After the Communist North’s invasion of South Korea in 1950, the brutal war lasted more than three years and cost hundreds of thousands of military and civilian lives.  More than 26,000 Canadians – some only teenagers, others veterans of the Second World War – crossed the Pacific Ocean to fight under the flag of the United Nations.  Over 500 Canadian soldiers, sailors, and air personnel made the ultimate sacrifice, and the lives of countless others were forever changed. The soldiers fought in conditions reminiscent of the First World War – cold, wet trench duty punctuated by terrifying night patrols into no man’s land.  They bravely battled both the harsh weather and enemy forces at places like Kapyong, the site of one of Canada’s most important victories. We take pride in Canada’s contributions, along with those of our United Nations allies, to defending the sovereignty of South Korea.  The courage and sacrifice of our Korean War veterans helped South Korea to become the peaceful and prosperous country we know today. Today, I urge all Canadians to learn more about the Korean War, and to participate in activities being held to honour the veterans.  As we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us recognize all those in our military, and their families who support them.  They help defend our most cherished values – openness, democracy, compassion, and respect for human rights – in Canada and around the world. Today, we recognize the women and men in Canada’s military and police forces who work to create peace and stability around the world. Canada’s strong tradition of peacekeeping owes much to Lester B.  Pearson, who championed the first armed United Nations peacekeeping mission during the Suez Crisis in 1956.  Our history of peacekeeping goes back even further, though, to our earliest missions to build peace and security across the globe. In 1949, Canada sent dedicated peacekeepers abroad for the first time – to bring calm to a dispute between India and Pakistan over the region of Kashmir.  A few years later, in the Middle East in 1954, Major-General E.  L.  M.  Burns became the first of many Canadians to command a UN peacekeeping mission. Over the years, Canadian peacekeepers have helped monitor ceasefires, protect the most vulnerable from the ravages of war, and build the foundations of peace.  Peacekeepers often endanger their own lives to help those most affected by violent conflict, in particular women and girls.  They work tirelessly to protect human rights, and to ensure the voices of the most vulnerable are represented in peace processes. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank all of our country’s peacekeepers – past and present – for their courageous efforts to build lasting peace around the world.  They represent the best of Canada.  We will continue to work with the UN and other organizations to create a safer, more secure world for all. On the International Day of the World’s Indigenous Peoples, we recognize Indigenous Peoples around the world, and recommit to protect and promote the rights of Indigenous Peoples. This year, the United Nations highlights the 10th anniversary of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  The declaration addresses the rights of Indigenous Peoples, including the right to self-determination.  It also outlines how principles of equality, partnership, and mutual respect must form the foundation of collaborative relationships with Indigenous Peoples. Many Indigenous leaders in Canada persevered over twenty-five years to advocate for, draft, and negotiate the UN Declaration.  Canada is grateful for their leadership, and fully supports the declaration. No relationship is more important to Canada than the one with Indigenous Peoples.  We are taking concrete steps to create a renewed relationship with First Nations, Inuit, and the Métis Nation – based on recognition of rights, respect, collaboration, and partnership. We are working in partnership with Indigenous Peoples to review federal laws and policies to ensure we respect both our constitutional obligations and international standards, including those set out in the UN Declaration.  We are also working collaboratively, transparently, and on a distinctions-basis to co-develop national First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Nation languages legislation, and we are making progress to address the Calls to Action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.  We are also creating a new space for Indigenous Peoples near Parliament Hill, which will honour our nation-to-nation, Inuit-Crown, and government-to-government relationship with Indigenous Peoples and recognize their importance to this country’s foundation and its future. Despite this progress, much work remains to be done to advance meaningful reconciliation and to make sure that Indigenous Peoples’ rights and voices are fully respected.  We will continue to work with First Nations, Inuit, and the Métis Nation to identify and make progress on shared priorities, so that their voices and perspectives guide the way forward. Our world’s history is one in which the rights, culture, history, and languages of Indigenous Peoples have been dismissed or violated for far too long.  Today, we acknowledge this unacceptable past, and we commit to build a world where the rights of Indigenous Peoples are respected.  Together, we can continue our journey of reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples – and create a better future for all of us. Today, I am pleased and relieved to confirm that Pastor Lim has been released from jail in North Korea and that he will soon be reunited with his family and friends in Canada. The Government of Canada was actively engaged on Mr.  Lim’s case at all levels.  In particular, I want to thank Sweden, our protecting power in North Korea, for assisting us. This week, a Canadian government delegation led by Daniel Jean, my Special Envoy, traveled to Pyongyang, North Korea, to discuss Pastor Lim’s case. Pastor Lim’s health and well-being remain of utmost importance to the Government of Canada, and we are working to ensure that he receives any required medical attention. Operational security considerations prevent us from discussing the matter further. I ask that the family’s wish for privacy be respected. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank Premier Brad Wall for his many years of service to Saskatchewan and our country. I have had the privilege of working closely with Premier Wall for more than a year and a half.  In that time, we have made important progress on the issues that matter most to middle class Canadians, including pensions, health care, growing our agricultural industry, and promoting our natural resources to the world. Premier Wall has worked tirelessly to promote Canada and Canadian exports with our international trading partners.  His efforts will benefit the people of Saskatchewan for years to come. Sophie and I thank Premier Wall for his many years of public service, and we wish him and his family the very best in the future. Today, on International Youth Day, we celebrate the limitless potential of young people.  We put a spotlight on their ideas and aspirations, which have the power to change the world.  We are inspired by their courage, passion, and the positive change they make every day. The theme of this year’s International Youth Day – Youth Building Peace – emphasizes how young leaders can help move societies beyond conflict and violence by promoting gender equality, inclusion, and education.  Earlier this year, I had the opportunity to meet one of these young peace builders, Malala Yousafzai.  Her relentless and inspiring work reminds us that young people are not just the leaders of tomorrow – they are leaders today. Listening to and appreciating the diverse views of young people will help us turn the vision of a more peaceful and prosperous planet into a reality.  That is why we have taken concrete steps like creating the Prime Minister’s Youth Council to give young people a voice in decisions that will shape their lives, their communities, and their country. As Minister of Youth, I know that young people everywhere are trying to make a difference.  We must continue to amplify their voices, give them a seat at the table, and connect them with opportunities.  Our future success depends on it. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all celebrating International Youth Day. Today, we join Pakistani communities in Canada and around the world to celebrate seven decades of Pakistan’s independence. Our two countries established a diplomatic relationship shortly after Pakistan was declared a sovereign nation in 1947.  We continue to work together to advance shared priorities, including governance and democracy, regional security, poverty reduction, polio eradication, trade, defence, and the fight against climate change. The people-to-people connections between Canada and Pakistan are older still.  People from what is now Pakistan first migrated to Canada well over a century ago and, since then, our connections have continued to grow. As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation in 2017, we honour the many cultures and communities that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Pakistani-Canadians continue to make major contributions to our country, and help make Canada the prosperous, vibrant, and open place it is today. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I offer our best wishes to all those celebrating Pakistan’s Independence Day. Today, the people of the Republic of Korea and Korean communities in Canada and around the world celebrate the 72nd anniversary of Korea’s independence, also known as ‘Gwangbokjeol’ or ‘Restoration of Light Day’. Over sixty years ago, thousands of Canadians fought in the Korean War in the defence of the Republic of Korea.  Since then, the Republic of Korea and Canada have been close friends and increasingly important economic partners.  Today, we share a commitment to democratic values, open markets, and the rule of law. I look forward to working with President Moon Jae-in to further deepen the relationship between our two countries.  Together, we will address important international issues, including peace and collective security, climate change, and trade liberalization. As Canada celebrates 150 years since Confederation, I invite all Canadians to recognize the significant contributions that Korean Canadians have made, and continue to make, to our country. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a happy Independence Day. Today, we join the people of India and members of the Indo-Canadian community to celebrate India’s 71st Independence Day. Our two countries share much in common, including our commitment to democracy, freedom, and the rule of law, and are linked by similar institutions and forms of government.  Above all, the success of Canada and India demonstrate that we both prosper not in spite of our diversity, but because of it. We enjoy a special relationship – one that we are committed to strengthening.  I recently met with Prime Minister Narendra Modi at the G20 Leaders’ Summit.  I look forward to continuing to collaborate with him on global issues, including peace and security, health, climate change, and gender equality. As we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I invite Canadians to reflect on the countless contributions Indo-Canadians make to our national fabric.  Canada is a  stronger and more prosperous country because of them. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish a happy Independence Day to all those celebrating. Today, we celebrate the proud heritage and vibrant culture of the Acadian people.  We also recognize their resilience through history, and the significant role they have played in shaping Canada. National Acadian Day traces its roots to the first Acadian national convention held in 1881 in Memramcook, New Brunswick.  During that convention, Acadian delegates chose to celebrate their national day on Our Lady of Assumption Day, in recognition of their French Catholic heritage. Descendants of French settlers, Acadians hold a unique place in Canada’s history.  Over centuries, they survived a deportation, endured exile, and persevered through relentless persecution.  Despite these hardships, Acadians grew into a distinct community with a beautiful language, a colourful culture, and a rich set of customs.  Today, Acadian music, poetry, literature, and theatre entertain and inspire people around the world. As we celebrate 150 years since Confederation, we also take time to recognize the people and communities at the heart of Canada’s success.  Acadians reflect the vibrant diversity that defines us as a country, and they continue to make important and unique contributions to our national fabric. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a happy National Acadian Day. I am deeply saddened that 18 people, including Canadians Tammy Chen and Bilel Diffalah, were killed during a terrorist attack on a popular restaurant in downtown Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.  Those lost include women and children, and people of many nationalities and backgrounds, who should have felt safe gathering together to share a meal. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I offer our condolences to the families and friends of those killed and wish a speedy recovery to all those injured. Canada strongly condemns this heinous attack.  People should not have to live in fear over their safety and security – no matter where they call home or where they travel.  We will continue to work closely with the international community to fight terrorism and bring those responsible to justice. These cowardly acts seek to instill fear and divide us.  In the face of hatred, we must stand united in the values of diversity, openness, and inclusion. I am deeply saddened by today’s terrorist attack in Barcelona that has killed and injured so many innocent people. Sophie and I join all Canadians in offering our sincere condolences to the families and friends who have lost loved ones, and our best wishes for a fast and full recovery to those injured today. While we cannot ignore the outrage we feel, together we must renew our commitment to protect the freedom found in societies that promote unity, openness and inclusion. Spain, we grieve with you and denounce hate and violence in all of its forms.  Canada will continue working with the international community to fight terrorism and build a world where we can all feel safe and secure. It was with great sadness that I learned today that one Canadian was killed and four others injured during yesterday’s cowardly terrorist attack in Barcelona.  Sophie and I offer our condolences to the families and friends in mourning, and hope for a speedy recovery for the injured Canadians. We join Spain and countries around the world in grieving the senseless loss of so many innocent people.  We must stand firm against the spread of hate and intolerance in all its forms.  These violent acts that seek to divide us will only strengthen our resolve. 75 years ago to this day, almost 5,000 Canadian soldiers, together with their British and American allies, landed in occupied France, on the shores around the town of Dieppe.  Today, we remember the Canadians who sacrificed greatly in this dramatic chapter of the Second World War. The soldiers were there to test German defences and gather important intelligence, but the raid ended in tragedy.  After nine hours, pinned down under enemy fire, the Allies withdrew.  Only 2,210 Canadians returned to Great Britain, many of whom were wounded.  Nearly 2,000 were taken as prisoners of war, most remaining in captivity until the end of the conflict.  In total, 916 Canadians were killed in the operation. Despite these brutal losses, the Canadians showed extraordinary heroism that day.  Honorary Captain John Weir Foote of the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry braved enemy bullets to bring wounded soldiers to first aid posts.  Lieutenant Colonel Charles Cecil Merritt of the South Saskatchewan Regiment led his men in a dangerous bridge crossing, and then helped many of them to return to the beaches through a brilliant rearguard action.  Both men remained behind rather than take the chance to escape.  For their bravery and sacrifice, they were awarded the Victoria Cross. The courage and steadfastness of these soldiers, and of so many others, exemplified the Canadian and Allied response after the raid.  The operation at Dieppe was the most devastating day of the entire Second World War for the Canadian military.  Yet it taught the Allies invaluable lessons – which, less than two years later, they used to help turn the tide of the war on D-Day. As we commemorate the Dieppe Raid at events in Canada and France, I ask all Canadians to honour the people who gave so much at Dieppe, as well as their families at home who suffered the loss of their loved ones.  Their story teaches us that our finest moments are often about overcoming challenges and defeats, rather than easy victories. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank all our veterans and those who gave their lives at Dieppe for their profound service, courage, and sacrifice. Lest we forget. Today, we join the United Nations in recognizing the humanitarian workers who risk their lives to protect the millions of civilians affected by crises around the world, and who uphold the humanitarian principles of neutrality, impartiality, and independence.   Rising insecurity, poverty, and the impacts of persecution and climate change have led to incredibly complex and protracted crises globally.  More people are displaced today, fleeing conflict and violence, than at any time since the Second World War. Escalating unrest and violence have made humanitarians’ lifesaving work even more difficult and dangerous.  Aid workers brave kidnapping, roadside bombs, and countless other threats.  They can lack reliable access to basic amenities like electricity and running water, and suffer greater risk of exposure to infectious disease. In the face of these challenges, humanitarians deliver vital assistance, relief, and hope to millions of people.  They do so without discrimination based on race, ethnic origin, religion, sex, or any other factor – setting an example for all of us. The people workers help are often among the world’s most vulnerable, including women and girls, who bear different and disproportionate effects of violent conflict and natural disaster.  Recognizing these unequal burdens, Canada has refocused its international assistance – through the new Feminist International Assistance Policy – to promote gender equality and better assist the unique needs of women and girls in crisis situations. Many humanitarian crises are rooted in enduring divisions and inequality.  As an international community, we have a responsibility to show that diversity and inclusion are strengths – and a force that can vanquish intolerance, radicalism, and hate. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank Canadian aid workers and all those engaged in humanitarian efforts around the world.  In extremely difficult circumstances, you support those in need, and stand up for the dignity and potential of all human beings. Today, we join people in Canada and around the world to remember the victims and survivors of Communism and Nazism in Europe, and to pay tribute to all those who continue to face violence, loss of dignity, and repression from totalitarian regimes. On Black Ribbon Day, we mark the anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, which was signed in 1939 between the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany.  The infamous agreement carved Eastern and Central Europe into spheres of influence of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union, and led to one of the darkest periods in human history. In the years that followed, the Soviet and Nazi regimes trampled upon national and personal freedoms across Europe.  They robbed millions of people of their lives and livelihoods, and subjected countless men, women, and children to untold atrocities. Many of those who struggled against the horrors of the Soviet and Nazi regimes came to Canada as refugees.  These Canadians and their descendants continue to make remarkable contributions to our country.  Their stories underscore the importance of universal human rights – and remind us of the fragility of freedom. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I urge Canadians to reflect on the significance of this day.  We all share the responsibility to promote and protect human rights, freedom, and democracy.  We must stand guard against those who seek to devalue the humanity of others, and uphold the inherent dignity of every human being. Today, Ukrainians and Ukrainian communities in Canada and around the world celebrate 26 years of independence and freedom. As we mark both this important occasion and 150 years since Confederation, I invite Canadians to reflect on the immeasurable contribution of the Ukrainian-Canadian community to building a diverse and inclusive Canada. On this day, the Government of Canada reiterates its full support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as Ukraine’s ongoing efforts to advance democracy, the rule of law, and sustainable economic development.  Canada looks forward to continuing to work closely with Ukraine in areas of mutual interest, including the implementation of the Canada-Ukraine Free Trade Agreement, which entered into force on August 1. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating a joyful Independence Day. Slava Ukraini!Today, Muslims in Canada and around the world will celebrate Eid al-Adha. Eid al-Adha marks the end of the annual Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca.  It is a time to reflect on lessons of sacrifice and charity, and to appreciate life’s many blessings. To mark this special occasion, Muslims will gather with family and friends to attend morning prayers, share celebratory meals, exchange gifts and greetings, and give to those in need.   This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, Eid al-Adha is an opportunity for us all to reflect on the important contributions the Muslim community has made to build the diverse, strong and inclusive country that we all call home. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating Eid al-Adha. Eid Mubarak!Canada unequivocally condemns North Korea’s? nuclear test of September 3 which, combined with its aggressive program of ballistic missile testing, represents a clear and present threat to the safety and security of its neighbours and the international community. This most recent test, which appears to have been of a much greater magnitude than its five previous nuclear explosions, is in direct contravention of multiple UN Security Council resolutions, and? demonstrates once again North Korea’s flagrant disregard of international law. These continued provocations by North Korea’s leadership, along with their profoundly dangerous push to develop nuclear weapons and test ballistic missiles near neighbouring countries, only serve to further isolate them. Canada has been steadfast in insisting that North Korea abandon its current course, including its aggressive rhetoric, and asks that it resumes constructive dialogue toward a comprehensive and verifiable solution. We urge the UN Security Council to take further decisive action to effectively constrain North Korea’s proliferation efforts, and call on all states to fully implement relevant UN sanctions. We will continue to work with key regional partners – including the United States, South Korea and Japan – as well as the broader international community, to counter the North Korean threat. •On Labour Day, we celebrate the many accomplishments of Canada’s labour movement.  For more than a century, Canadians have come together to fight for a safer, more equitable, and just workplace.  Their hard-won victories brought about fair wages, weekends, and paid sick days, among many other benefits and protections we take for granted today.  The discipline and dedication of organized labour continue to build our country and lay the foundation for one of the strongest middle classes in the world. Our government was elected on a promise to grow the middle class, and pave the way for more Canadians to have a real and fair chance at success.  We have taken great strides to prepare Canadians for the changing economy, and create good, middle class jobs from coast-to-coast-to-coast.  Over the past year, we introduced measures to relieve the pressures adults face when deciding to go back to school, made it easier for Canadians on EI to obtain new certificates and training, and helped hundreds of thousands of low- and middle-income students pay their tuition.  We also launched the union-based apprenticeship training program, and established agreements to expand affordable, high quality child care across the country. In the coming months, we will update laws to better support Canadian workers as they seek to balance the responsibilities of work and family.  Targeted amendments to the Canada Labour Code will give federally-regulated employees the right to request more flexible work arrangements, such as the ability to work from home, and provide unpaid leave for family responsibilities. We continue to work closely with organized labour to protect and promote workers’ rights, and affirm the vital role unions play in helping the middle class grow and prosper.  We recently passed Bill C-4, restoring a fair and balanced approach to federal labour relations, and ratified the International Labour Organization’s Convention 98, recognizing workers’ right to collectively bargain.  We also pledged to ban the manufacture, import, export and use of asbestos in Canada by 2018, and renewed our commitment to ensure the Westray Law is applied effectively and negligent employers are held responsible. Organized labour has a strong partner in the Government of Canada.  We will continue to stand up for the middle class and invest in Canada’s hardworking, creative, and diverse workforce.  Since December 2015, Canada’s unemployment rate has dropped from 7. 1 per cent to 6. 3 per cent.  In the last year, the Canadian economy has created almost 400,000 new jobs.  Today, we celebrate Canada’s workers and labour movement who made this progress possible. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all Canadians a safe and happy Labour Day.  Today, on the first annual Firefighters’ National Memorial Day, we take a moment to remember those who have answered their last alarm. We solemnly honour Canada’s more than 1,300 firefighters who have died in the line of duty since the first recorded fatality in 1848, including the 13 who have died this year.  We mourn them with their loved ones, friends and colleagues. There can be no greater gesture than to put oneself in harm’s way to save the life of another.  We must never forget the enormous risks our firefighters face to keep us safe, or the sacrifices they and their families are called upon to make. In particular, I want to offer our sincere gratitude for the efforts of the firefighters who having been fighting the 2017 wildfires in British Columbia, and of those who tackled the 2016 blaze in Fort McMurray, Alberta. Firefighting is fraught with danger, and that includes emotional and mental stress.  We recognize the toll this work takes on the lives of firefighters and those close to them. The Government of Canada is committed to supporting the women and men who risk their lives to keep Canadians safe.  Budget 2017 includes an investment of $80 million over five years, starting in 2018-19, and $20 million thereafter, for the establishment of a grant program to support the families of all public safety officers – firefighters, police and paramedics – who made the ultimate sacrifice to keep Canadians safe. Working collaboratively with provinces, territories, first responders, and other key stakeholders, we are also developing a coordinated national action plan to address post-traumatic stress disorder and other occupational stress injuries, in support of public safety officers. Every year from now on, to honour the service and sacrifice of Canada’s firefighters, the Canadian flag will fly at half-mast on all federal buildings and establishments — including the Peace Tower — from sunrise to sunset on the second Sunday in September. Today, as we remember and honour the legacy of sacrifice, dedication and bravery provided by our firefighters, let us ensure that Canada forever remains a country where generosity of heart prevails, and where Canadians continue to look out for the wellbeing of those around them. Sixteen years ago today, terrorist attacks in the United States killed nearly 3,000 innocent victims, including 24 Canadians.  On this solemn anniversary, we remember the lives taken so cruelly, and we offer our deepest sympathies to their loved ones and the many who still struggle with the trauma caused by these attacks. Today, we also honour the bravery of the first responders and countless others who put themselves in harm’s way on 9/11.  We remember those who knowingly risked their lives to save others – who rushed into the rubble, who climbed the stairs of the collapsing towers, who stormed the cockpit of a hijacked plane.  Their acts of heroism and sacrifice live on, through the women and men they saved, and the stories from which we continue to draw strength. Even in the darkness of 9/11, humanity’s capacity for goodness shone through.  We continue to be inspired by the people of Gander, Halifax, Vancouver and other Canadian cities who opened their hearts and their homes to stranded air travelers and crews from around the world in the aftermath of these attacks. On this National Day of Service, I also want to thank those who continue to fight on the front lines against terrorism – women and men in uniform, the intelligence community, diplomats, and security and law enforcement professionals.  They work tirelessly to keep us safe at home and abroad. While recent events have shown that no country is immune to senseless acts of terror, we must stand united – as an international community – against violence and all acts that seek to sow fear and division.  Such acts only strengthen our resolve to counter hate by promoting the values of diversity, inclusion, and peace. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage Canadians to take part in acts of service today to honour the selflessness shown by so many on 9/11. Today, Coptic Christians in Canada and around the world will celebrate the Feast of Nayrouz, also known as the Feast of Rivers, and welcome the Coptic New Year. Nayrouz commemorates those who were persecuted because of their faith in Egypt under Roman rule and also marks the beginning of Thout – the first month of the Coptic calendar.  It is a time of renewal for Coptic Christians, who come together to exchange gifts and pray as a community. Tracing their ancestry to the ancient Egyptians, Coptic Christians have successfully preserved their rich faith and traditions, including Nayrouz, throughout the centuries.  Today, Coptic Christian communities are found around the world. As we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation this year, I invite Canadians to reflect on the diverse faiths and cultural communities that have chosen to make this country home.  Openness to different cultures, together with freedom of worship, has allowed Canada to become as diverse as it is strong. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a happy Nayrouz!On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to congratulate the Conservative Party on their success in yesterday’s general election.  This closely-contested election was a testament to the strength and dynamism of Norway’s democracy. Canada will continue to work with the international community, including Norway, to promote democracy, good governance, and human rights, and advance initiatives that address the needs of all our citizens as they adapt to a rapidly changing world.  As members of the Arctic Council, Canada and Norway also have a particular responsibility to address climate change and support sustainable development in the Arctic region. Relations between our two countries were forged during the Second World War, when thousands of exiled Norwegian military personnel trained in Canada for the eventual liberation of their homeland.  Since that time, Norway and Canada have become close economic partners and firm NATO allies.  Our two countries are committed to values of equality, democracy, and human rights.  Together we promote these values abroad in the UN and other organizations.  Our relationship will continue to expand and develop as we face the future together. It was with sadness that I learned last night of the death of one of Canada’s most respected leaders, former Member of Parliament, Senator and Cabinet Minister the Honourable Allan J.  MacEachen. Allan J.  MacEachen – known affectionately as Allan J.  – distinguished himself as a senior minister and public servant during one of the longest political careers in Canadian history.  He was a true friend of my father, a great son of Cape Breton, and a peerless servant of Canada. Allan represented his constituents while serving in various roles in the House of Commons, including as a cabinet minister, government leader, and the first deputy prime minister.  In every role, Allan endeavoured to better the lives of those he served.  He succeeded.  He played a pivotal role to advance many landmark social issues, including old age pensions, the labour code, and minimum wage. Of his many contributions, Allan will be most remembered as a champion of nationwide medicare.  Through years of contentious deliberations, he never lost sight of an equitable health care system for Canadians.  In 1966, as Minister of National Health and Welfare, he oversaw the passage of the Medical Care Act, and helped lay the foundation for a program that continues to define Canada today. In 1984, Allan joined the Senate of Canada, serving as government and then opposition leader until he retired in 1996.  In recognition of his work, he was named an Officer of the Order of Canada, and awarded the Golden and Diamond Jubilee Medal.  He was also honoured with the opening of the MacEachen Institute for Public Policy and Governance at Dalhousie University – a fitting tribute for a respected parliamentarian who started his career in academics. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our sincere condolences to his family, friends, and the people of Cape Breton.  Canada is a stronger and more compassionate country because of Allan’s dedicated public service and unwavering commitment to Canadians. Canada lost one of its most devoted servants today. I was deeply saddened to learn of the death of my close friend and colleague Arnold Chan.  On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to his wife, Jean; to their three sons, Nathaniel, Ethan, and Theodore; and to Arnold’s parents, brother, friends, and constituents. Arnold was elected to serve the people of Scarborough-Agincourt in 2014.  For three and a half years, he distinguished himself as a thoughtful, kind and – above all – tireless advocate for Canadians.  He believed deeply in our democracy and became one of its most faithful and eloquent guardians. Arnold accomplished all of this despite battling cancer throughout most of his time as an MP.  Even at his sickest, he found the strength to stand up in the House of Commons and represent his constituents, who he cared about so deeply. In June, Arnold delivered an impassioned speech to the House.  I encourage all Canadians to take time today to listen to Arnold’s words, which hold lessons for us all.  He reminds us that real democracy means listening to each other instead of talking over each other, and that our civic duty includes not just casting a ballot but taking care, in our everyday actions, of the country we are lucky to call home. In 2015, Arnold became Deputy Leader of the Government in the House of Commons.  He was a committed advocate for the Armenian-Canadian community and chaired the Canada-Armenia Parliamentary Friendship Group. I am forever enriched by Arnold’s friendship, as Canadians are by his leadership and devoted service.  He leaves us with wise words that he truly embodied: ‘We should use our heads, but follow our hearts. ’Today, we join our partners in the United Nations to celebrate the International Day of Democracy.  We take the opportunity to recognize the freedoms that democracy affords us – and remind ourselves of the responsibility we all share to keep our democracy strong. This year’s theme – Democracy and Conflict Prevention – highlights the indivisible links between peace and democracy.  Canada recognizes the critical need to strengthen democratic norms and institutions around the world to promote peace and stability.  In order to endure, both peace and democracy must be built through inclusive approaches that respect human rights and diversity and promote gender equality.  Women and girls’ leadership and participation in political, social, and peacebuilding processes are essential to creating political systems that truly represent the voices of all members of society. Equality is vital to a thriving democracy, and Canada reaffirms the need to work to change the severe disparities that exist in our world.  To address these gaps, Canada and all UN member states adopted the ambitious 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.  The agenda provides a framework to eradicate poverty, protect our environment, and promote human rights.  Our countries – and our world – are stronger and more peaceful when all people can make their voices heard, and when everyone’s rights are protected. Today is also the launch of Elections Canada’s Canada’s Democracy Week, a time for all Canadians, especially young people, to get engaged in the democratic process and talk about what democracy means to them and their communities. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I call on all Canadians to get informed and involved.  By using our voices as forces for positive change, we can strengthen democratic norms and institutions in Canada and help make democracy a reality for all people around the world. I am very pleased that Member of Parliament for St.  Catharines, Chris Bittle, has been appointed as the new Deputy Leader of the Government in the House of Commons. Working closely with the Honourable Bardish Chagger, the Leader of the Government in the House of Commons, Chris Bittle will encourage close collaboration and meaningful engagement with House of Commons colleagues, Parliamentary Committees, the Public Service, stakeholders, and Canadians.  He will also play an instrumental role as we work to modernize the House of Commons and make it more accountable, predictable, efficient, and transparent. Mr.  Bittle’s experience as a Member of the Standing Committee on Justice and Human Rights, its Subcommittee on Agenda and Procedure, and on two groups that promote cooperation between parties in Parliament – the Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association and the Canada-Italy Interparliamentary Group – will be invaluable in this new role.  His legal background will also serve him well as we focus on effective and accountable governance that supports our long-term plan to create jobs, strengthen the middle class, and secure a more prosperous future for all Canadians. While we look forward to welcoming our new Deputy House Leader, we also continue to mourn the passing of our dear friend and colleague, Member of Parliament Arnold Chan, who served in the role for almost two years.  His commitment to Canadians, devotion to public service, and zeal for democratic values will continue to motivate and inspire us for years to come. Today, Hindu communities in Canada and around the world will celebrate Navratri. Navratri is one of the most important festivals for the Hindu community.  It symbolizes the triumph of good over evil, and is celebrated over nine consecutive nights. On this occasion, family and friends gather to pray, share special meals, exchange greetings, dance, and celebrate.  The nine-night festival is now celebrated by Hindus and non-Hindus alike in South Asia and around the world, including in Canada. As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I invite Canadians to reflect on the important contributions of Canada’s Hindu community to our national fabric.  Canada is a stronger and more prosperous country because of its diversity. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating Navratri. Tonight at sunset, Jewish communities in Canada and around the world will celebrate Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year. Rosh Hashanah is celebrated on the first and second days of the month of Tishrei and marks the beginning of the Days of Awe.  It is a time to reflect on the past year and look forward to the year ahead with hope and intention. This year, Rosh Hashanah comes at a time of great anxiety for the Jewish community in Canada.  We have seen hateful, anti-Semitic acts target innocent people and the places where they gather and worship.  The Government of Canada stands firmly with the Jewish community in the face of this hatred and condemns all forms of racism, xenophobia, and discrimination. In the spirit of Rosh Hashanah, I urge all Canadians to reflect on the values we hold dear as a country.  What makes us strong – our openness, compassion, diversity and inclusion – is enshrined in our laws and statutes.  Yet they are only meaningful when we put them into practice, through the choices we make every day.  Each of us must be confident and untiring custodians of these values and do our part to repair the world. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating Rosh Hashanah a healthy, peaceful, and prosperous New Year. Shana Tova Umetukah!Today, we join the people of Armenia and members of the Armenian community in Canada and around the world to celebrate the anniversary of Armenia’s independence. Canada and the Republic of Armenia enjoy a dynamic and friendly relationship, built upon shared values of justice, democracy and freedom, people-to-people connections, and our collaboration in international organizations, including La Francophonie. Canada looks forward to continuing to work with the Republic of Armenia to further strengthen the relationship between our two countries, and to deepen our collaboration on global and regional issues, including climate change, development cooperation, trade and investment, and peace and security. Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride.  I commend the Armenian Canadian community for their generosity and leadership in welcoming thousands of newcomers from Syria.  When we come together to welcome newcomers, we strengthen our communities in long-lasting and significant ways. This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I invite Canadians to reflect on the important contributions Canadians of Armenian descent make to our national fabric. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish a happy Independence Day to all those celebrating. This year, as we celebrate the 25th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Canada and Ukraine, we reflect on the important milestones achieved since we last met in Kyiv in July 2016. Expanding Economic OpportunitiesThe entry into force of the Canada-Ukraine Free Trade Agreement (CUFTA) represents a historic moment in our bilateral relations.  We are committed to working closely together to ensure that Canadians and Ukrainians alike can take advantage of the benefits of CUFTA as soon as possible. Through the implementation of this agreement, we are looking forward to boosting bilateral trade between Ukraine and Canada in agriculture, information technology, energy and aerospace.  Under CUFTA’s two-year review clause, we will examine the possibility of extending CUFTA’s coverage to additional areas, such as services and investment. Enhancing Security CooperationCanada is unequivocal in its support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.  Canada reiterates its non-recognition of Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and continues to condemn Russian military aggression in Donbas.  Canada is committed to maintaining pressure on Russia to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and to implement fully its Minsk commitments, including through ongoing sanctions. Operation UNIFIER supports the important military training and capacity building efforts undertaken by Ukraine to maintain its sovereignty and security, while fostering a mutually-beneficial learning environment for both Canadian and Ukrainian Armed Forces. Canada will continue to support Ukraine’s progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration and to adopt and implement NATO standards through its ambitious agenda of reforms.  Canada values Ukraine’s commitment to its relationship with NATO and its significant contributions to Allied operations.  Against the backdrop of shared security challenges, we reaffirm our common interest in international peace through our bilateral Defence Cooperation Arrangement (DCA) and our shared commitment to advancing Ukraine’s defence reform agenda.  Canada supports Ukraine’s goal of achieving NATO interoperability by 2020, providing both tactical training and strategic advice. Sharing Common ValuesCanada shares a strong bond with Ukraine, rooted in generations of Ukrainian migration to Canada.  We look forward to building on our strong people-to-people ties, including through the promotion of youth mobility, to forge new bonds between our countries for generations to come. We recognize the strong progress made in Ukraine’s reform efforts and the launch of Agenda 2020, as well as Canada’s contribution to that progress.  Sustained effort will be critical to ensuring durable institutional transformation, unblocking obstacles to reform and unlocking Ukraine’s full potential.  We are guided in our efforts and in our outlook by our shared commitment to the values of inclusivity and respect for diversity. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to congratulate Angela Merkel and the Christian Democratic Union for winning the most votes in the German general election.  Her principal challenger, Martin Schulz, led a formidable campaign.  The closeness of the vote and scope of issues debated was a testament to the vibrancy of Germany’s democracy. As the next German government takes shape, I look forward to continuing to work with Chancellor Merkel and her interim government on issues that matter to both Canadians and Germans, including international security, climate change, managed migration for those displaced due to crisis, and the implementation of the Canada-EU Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement. Canada and Germany are bound by more than just common interests.  We are compassionate societies that understand diversity is a source of strength.  Our institutions aspire to show openness and respect to all people, and we share a vision of progressive, sustainable economies that benefit everyone.  These values will guide us as we move forward together to face the most pressing issues of our time. On October 2nd, 2017, His Excellency the Right Honourable David Johnston will return to private life after holding this country’s highest and oldest office.  His Excellency served with the utmost dedication and dignity, remarkable intelligence, and exceptional character.  He did so not for the customary term of five years, but for an extraordinary seven. As Canada’s 28th Governor General, His Excellency brought tenacity, drive, and deep compassion to the accomplishment of his duties as the representative of our Monarch, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.  He proudly served as the 11th Governor General of Canada under her reign. Together with Her Excellency Sharon Johnston, the Governor General focused his mandate on supporting learning, innovation, and civic engagement.  He advocated staunchly for education and for the needs of families and young people, worked to promote diversity and inclusion, and exemplified his belief in Canadians’ ability to create a more caring country and a more just world. Throughout his term, His Excellency prioritized connecting with the people he served.  He visited all corners of our country to do so, and represented Canadians and their values in his travels around the world.  His service has left an indelible imprint on the Office of the Governor General, and shaped Canada for the better. In recognition of his contributions and as is customary in these instances, I am proud to announce a gift to the Governor General from the Government of Canada.  In his honour, the Rideau Hall Foundation – which His Excellency helped found in 2012 – will receive a $3 million grant and up to $7 million in matching funds over a 10-year period.  This funding will help the Rideau Hall Foundation continue its important work to connect people, ideas, and resources.  It will support initiatives that strengthen our identity, amplify the reach of the Office of the Governor General, and help build a stronger Canada. Your Excellencies, Sophie and I thank you for all you have done in service to Canada and Canadians.  Your dedication is an example for all of us.  Our country is stronger because of you. Tonight at sunset, Jewish communities in Canada and around the world will observe the beginning of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement. Yom Kippur, which occurs on the tenth day of the month of Tishrei, is one of the holiest days in the Jewish calendar.  It marks the end of the Ten Days of Awe, and is a time for introspection, repentance, and renewal. On this sacred day, people will gather with family and friends to fast and pray, reflect on the past year, and look forward with hope and renewed purpose to the year ahead.  For all of us, Yom Kippur is a chance to reflect on our values and recommit ourselves to putting them into practice. This year, we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation – an opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.  Jewish Canadians as individuals and as a community have greatly contributed to Canada’s success over the last 150 years and continue to play an important role in all aspects of Canadian life. For many people in the Jewish community in Canada, Yom Kippur comes at a time of anxiety this year, in the wake of recent hateful, anti-Semitic acts.  The Government of Canada stands firmly with the Jewish community in the face of this hatred.  We will continue to work to counter anti-Semitism, racism, and hatred in all its forms, and to build a more inclusive Canada. On behalf of our entire family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to the Jewish community and all those observing Yom Kippur. G’mar Chatimah Tovah. The Government of Canada and Canadians stand with the people of Edmonton after the terrorist attack on Saturday that sent an Edmonton Police Service officer to hospital and injured a number of innocent people who were out to cheer on their football team and to enjoy an evening in their city.  I am deeply concerned and outraged by this tragedy. Our thoughts are with those injured, their family and friends, and all those affected by this senseless act of violence.  I am also grateful for the first responders who were there on the scene, and the enforcement authorities who have been working through the night to make sure that everybody in Edmonton and Alberta is safe and secure.  Police officers put themselves at great personal risk every single day on our behalf, and this attack is a stark reminder of the sacrifices they make for the public good. While the investigation continues, early reports indicate that this is another example of the hate that we must remain ever vigilant against.  The RCMP and the Edmonton Police Service, through the Integrated National Enforcement Team, are working closely together to bring those involved to justice. We cannot – and will not – let violent extremism take root in our communities.  We know that Canada’s strength comes from our diversity, and we will not be cowed by those who seek to divide us or promote fear.  Edmonton is a strong and resilient city, and I am confident that its citizens will support one another to overcome this tragic event. Throughout our history, women have played a foundational role to shape the strong, dynamic, open country we all call home.  During Women’s History Month, we celebrate the outstanding achievements of women and their remarkable contributions to our country. In Canada and around the world, women have been powerful agents of change throughout history, and they continue to make a difference in communities everywhere.  From the sciences to the arts, business to government, women have made major contributions to every field imaginable.  Women’s leadership has been essential to advancing social justice and human rights everywhere, and has helped to create a better, more equal world for all of us. This year’s Women’s History Month theme – Claim Your Place – is a call to action, reminding us that we must continue to honour women’s achievements, and to push for progress on gender equality and inclusion.  While we have made tremendous progress over the past 150 years, we have much more work to do.  Sexism, discrimination, and gender-based violence are still a part of daily life for too many women in Canada and around the world.  This is unacceptable – and it is up to all of us to build a world where all people, no matter their gender identity, have the same opportunities, where women’s rights are respected, and where their voices are heard. Our Government is working hard to advance gender equality and ensure that all people, no matter their gender, have the opportunity to realize their full potential.  We are working to strengthen women’s leadership in business and government and to provide young women with the opportunities they need to advance their careers.  With our Feminist International Assistance Policy, we made empowering women and girls the focus of our international aid.  We also recognize that women continue to bear a disproportionate responsibility for family care, and our enhanced support for families – from the Canada Child Benefit, to improved access to funding so parents can go back to work or back to school – responds to this reality.  We are proud of the steps we have taken, and we will continue to make advancing gender equality a priority. This month, and throughout the year, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to join us in celebrating the courageous women – past and present – who have shaped our country.  Trailblazing women have helped make Canada what it is today.  Every day, women build on that history, and continue to shape our world for the better. On National Seniors Day, we celebrate seniors across Canada and honour their invaluable contributions to our country.  Canada’s seniors hold a unique and cherished place within our families, our workplaces, and our communities. Seniors have a lasting and life-changing impact on us all.  They raise and mentor succeeding generations, pass on important lessons, and help us learn to care for our world and each other.  They take care of us as we grow, help us through the hard moments, and celebrate with us in good times.  Canada’s seniors make a difference in all our lives, and contribute each day to making our country stronger, more open, and more inclusive. Our Government recognizes the pivotal role seniors play in the wellbeing of our whole country.  We are working hard to ensure they have the support they need and the secure and dignified retirement they deserve.  We strengthened the Canada Pension Plan, increased the Guaranteed Income Supplement for the lowest-income single seniors, and restored the age of eligibility for the Old Age Security benefits from 67 to 65.  We also created the Canada Caregiver Credit to provide better support to those who need it most and help families take care of their loved ones.  We are also investing in home care and housing for seniors so more seniors can get the care and support they need in their communities.  Whether in housing, health care, or income security, we will continue to help Canadian seniors get the support they need to participate in their communities and enjoy a secure and dignified retirement. Seniors carry stories that help us understand who we are as a country, and knowledge that helps us better contribute to our communities.  As workers, volunteers, and members of our families and communities, they help build a stronger Canada and a better world. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to say thank you and recognize a senior in their life – a parent, grandparent, or mentor – for everything they contribute to Canadian society.  Their past and present continue to help create a better future for all of us. It is my honour to welcome, on behalf of all Canadians, Canada’s 29th Governor General, Her Excellency the Right Honourable Julie Payette. In welcoming Her Excellency, we also honour Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, the Queen of Canada.  This is the 12th Governor General whose appointment was made by Her Majesty during her 65 year reign.  We honour her commitment to ensuring that this office is held by an individual who represents the best of our country. Many Canadians already know much of the story of Her Excellency’s life – a story that testifies to her talent and drive, and marks her as a truly exceptional Canadian.  Her Excellency flew two missions to space, was Chief Astronaut for the Canadian Space Agency, and proudly carried the Olympic flag during the opening ceremonies of the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics.  As the second Canadian woman in space and only the fourth woman Governor General, Her Excellency has been and continues to be a trailblazer and an inspiration for all of us. Her Excellency’s knowledge, determination, and curiosity about the world around her led her to achieve her dreams – and in doing so, she showed a whole country that their dreams were within reach, too.  Her Excellency’s achievements are a testament to her hard work, discipline, and passion, and her work has been recognized with many distinctions and 27 honorary doctorates.  As an astronaut, engineer, scientific broadcaster, and corporate director, Her Excellency has proven herself to be a tireless and respected leader, a team player, and a powerful agent of change. Above all, Her Excellency represents the very best of what it means to be Canadian.  She embodies dedicated service and a commitment to integrity.  In her new role, she will continue to do vital work to promote our unique Canadian identity.  She will travel to communities across the country to discuss with Canadians the issues that matter to them and to honour those who demonstrate exceptional service to their communities and our world. As Commander-in-Chief, she will help highlight the importance of Canada’s military and the selfless sacrifices of its members and their families.  Her Excellency will also represent Canada while visiting and hosting international dignitaries, to further strengthen our links with countries and people around the world. This has been an important year for Canada.  The 150th anniversary of Confederation has given us an opportunity to reflect on our past and present, as well as on our dreams and aspirations for our future.  Her Excellency will help us realize these shared hopes for tomorrow.  Her life has already inspired so many to dream big, push boundaries, and explore what exists beyond the here and now.  I have no doubt that she will excel at representing this wonderful country and continue to inspire countless Canadians in her new role. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank Her Excellency for accepting this call to service.  We look forward to seeing her fulfill her mandate while engaging Canadians on our path forward and promoting the values that make this country strong. I also join all Canadians to again extend our sincere gratitude to the Right Honourable David Johnston and Mrs.  Sharon Johnston for their service over the past seven years.  Their grace, dedication, and humility will continue to inspire us. Our hearts break for our American friends and neighbours today.  On behalf of all Canadians, I offer my deepest condolences to those who lost loved ones and friends, and my prayers for a fast and full recovery for the many injured. We stand with the United States, and share their pain and horror at such a senseless and cowardly act of violence. Las Vegas has long been celebrated by people from around the globe, including many Canadians.  We grieve with this city and the United States.  Such acts only strengthen our resolve to stand together, united. This city is a destination for people from around the world, and we are following up on reports of Canadian victims.  Consular officials are in close contact with local authorities. Friends and relatives of Canadian citizens known to be in the area can contact Global Affairs Canada's 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre by calling 613-996-8885 or 1-800-387-3124, or by sending an email to sos@international. gc. ca. Today, I join Canadians of Chinese, Korean, Japanese, and Vietnamese heritage to celebrate the Mid-Autumn Festival. Also known as the Moon Festival, the Mid-Autumn Festival is celebrated on the 15th day of the eighth month of the lunar calendar, when the moon is at its fullest and brightest.  It symbolizes a good harvest, and is a time to give thanks for the year’s successes. On this occasion, families and loved ones join together to light lanterns, exchange greetings and gifts, and share mooncakes.  The festival is also a moment to celebrate the round moon, which represents family unity. Canada is a stronger and more prosperous country because of its diversity.  As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, we continue to honour the many cultures and communities that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a happy Mid-Autumn Festival. Today, we join the international community to celebrate teachers.  On World Teachers’ Day, we honour the work teachers and educators do to shape our communities and our world for the better. Teachers are compassionate, curious, and constantly seek new ways to solve challenges and explain complex issues.  They understand that more important than having all the answers is listening to the needs of their students – and they work tirelessly to empower students to find the answers and take ownership of their own path.  Above all, teachers help their students walk away from the classroom with respect for others and for themselves.  They know that the world will be shaped by the students they teach – and they have an extraordinary impact on that world, every day, in the classroom. This year’s theme –Teaching in Freedom, Empowering Teachers – highlights the significant part teachers can play to make the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals a reality.  When teachers have the freedom and support they need to help students realize their full potential, whole societies benefit from greater prosperity and stronger democracy. Canada is working to advance Sustainable Development Goal 4 – lifelong learning and inclusive, quality education for all.  In Budget 2017, we increased access to funding so that adults can more easily go back to school.  We are also investing in child care, including in training and support for early childhood educators.  Last year, we also created a tax benefit for teachers and early childhood educators, which gives teachers important support to help their students succeed.  With our Feminist International Assistance Policy, we are promoting equal educational opportunities for women and girls around the world.  We are also investing in Canadian schools and in Indigenous education across the country. I am exceptionally proud to have been a teacher, and I have tremendous respect for the work teachers do every day.  That is why I am pleased to launch the nomination period for this year’s Prime Minister’s Awards for Teaching Excellence and Excellence in Early Childhood Education.  These awards recognize exemplary teachers who are preparing the next generation for success in our changing economy.  This year, we are including 17 new awards that will recognize inspirational Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) teachers, who are encouraging the innovation that will drive Canada forward today and tomorrow.  I encourage all Canadians to honour teachers who are making a real difference and nominate them for the awards. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank all teachers and educators in Canada and around the world for helping us succeed as individuals and prosper as societies.  You give the very best of yourselves, and change lives, every day, for the better. Today, Canadians across the country will celebrate Thanksgiving – a day to gather with family and friends and give thanks for the many blessings we enjoy in our lives. Thanksgiving is a time to celebrate the harvest, and a chance to appreciate the many people who contribute every day to our communities.  We honour our service members, who courageously and selflessly defend our country’s fundamental values of justice, democracy, and freedom.  We also give thanks for the people who work each day to change our lives for the better.  People across Canada contribute in thousands of ways to keep us healthy and safe, and to make our communities stronger and more open. This holiday also reminds us that many people, in Canada and around the world, do not share equally in the benefits we enjoy.  Thanksgiving asks us to remember those less fortunate, and to show compassion to those in need – not only today, but every day. This year, as we mark 150 years of Confederation, we recognize the countless people and communities who help make Canada strong, inclusive, and prosperous.  As we give thanks for our blessings, let us look for new ways to give generously of ourselves, too.  All of our actions, no matter how small, have an impact on the world – and each of us has a role to play to change our world for the better. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish everyone a very happy Thanksgiving. Today Canadians and people around the world reflect on the central role that mental health plays in our lives.  On World Mental Health Day, we raise awareness about how to better address the mental health issues that affect us, our loved ones, our workplaces, and our communities. Mental health is a vital part of our overall wellbeing, and everyone deserves access to the mental health care and support they need.  Today is a chance to celebrate the people who are working to make mental health care a reality around the world – and a reminder that all of us have a role to play to fight stigma and create cultures where we can talk openly about mental health.  We also recognize the importance of the lived experience of those directly affected by a mental health issue, and of their loved ones.  Their stories and voices must be at the core of efforts to improve mental health care for all. This year’s theme – Mental Health in the Workplace – reminds us that for many people, work can be a source of stress and lead to mental health challenges.  It is up to all of us to create workplaces that promote mental health and respond to employees’ diverse needs.  As an employer, the government is working to ensure workplaces are healthy and safe.  We also recognize that women face particular challenges in the workplace, and bear a disproportionate responsibility for mental health care.  We all benefit when women participate fully in our economy and our communities, and we must do more to build workplaces that are free of discrimination, and safe and healthy for people of all gender identities. Canada has made important advances in mental health care, and our Government is committed to continue to promote care, support, and services.  Budget 2017 includes $5 billion over 10 years to support mental health initiatives across Canada – the first time the federal government has prioritized mental health in health agreements with provinces and territories.  Last week, we launched a new suicide prevention strategy for our active service members and veterans, to make sure we are providing them with the best care possible.  We are making major investments in housing and in jobs and skills training – because access to safe, adequate, and affordable housing and a well-paying job are critical factors in our health, both physical and mental.  Budget 2017 also pledges over $200 million over the next five years to increase support for mental health services for First Nations and Inuit, building on Indigenous-led initiatives. Today, I especially want to thank all those who have shared their stories and experiences around mental health – including my mother, Margaret.  Their courage and openness have helped to fight stigma and made it easier for us to talk openly about mental health.  Together, we can build on their efforts, and support the mental health of Canadians for generations to come. Today, we celebrate girls everywhere.  International Day of the Girl draws attention to the importance of girls’ rights, and shines a light on the power of girls around the world. There are over one billion girls in the world.  Each one has the potential to shape our world for the better – and each one has a right to live, learn, and work without fear of discrimination or violence, to pursue her life goals, and to reach her full potential.  Girls make our communities stronger – and all of us benefit when all people, no matter their gender identity, are able to dream without limits. This year’s United Nations theme – EmPOWER Girls: Before, during and after crises – marks the beginning of a year-long effort to address the challenges girls face before, during, and after crises.  Girls experience different and disproportionate effects of crises, and we must work globally to respond to this reality. Our world has made important progress to advance girls’ rights – but we have much further to go to make sure the rights of girls everywhere are respected and protected.  In Canada and around the world, far too many girls are subjected to sexual and gender-based violence, and struggle to get the quality education, health care, and economic opportunities they need.  All of us have the power – and the responsibility – to work together to break down the barriers girls face, and to help girls make their voices heard. Everyone benefits when women and girls can participate freely and fully in our economies and societies, and advancing girls’ rights is a top priority for our Government.  Canada’s Feminist International Assistance Policy makes empowering women and girls a focus in all our international aid. At home, we are supporting schools and early childhood education, health care, and jobs and skills training – and these investments help girls and young women get the support and opportunities they need.  We are also encouraging young women’s leadership, including on the Prime Minister’s Youth Council.  Young women make up more than half of the council, where they have a strong voice in issues that matter to them and to our country. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I ask Canadians to join us to celebrate the power of girls.  Girls in Canada and around the world are building a better future for all of us – and all of us have a role to play to help them succeed and thrive. This week is Small Business Week, a time to celebrate and thank Canada’s small and medium sized businesses for their immense contributions to our country’s prosperity.  It is also an opportunity for current and aspiring entrepreneurs to connect, share experiences, and learn new ways to make their businesses even more successful. Small business owners move Canada forward.  They invest in our communities, transform new ideas into market-ready products and services, and unlock economic opportunities that create jobs and grow the middle class. Small businesses are the backbone of our economy.  They make up 98 per cent of all business operations in Canada, employ over 70 per cent of the total labour force in the private sector, and contribute more than 30 per cent to our gross domestic product. We know that when small businesses prosper, so does Canada.  That is why Budget 2017 introduced the Innovation and Skills Plan to remove barriers and help small and medium sized businesses reach new markets, and to ensure that they have the technology, talent, and tools they need to thrive, grow, and prosper.  That is also why we have been meeting with small businesses and listening to their feedback as we work toward making Canada’s tax system more fair and competitive. Today, I joined Ministers Morneau and Chagger to announce that the Government intends to lower the small business tax rate to ten per cent in 2018 and to nine per cent in 2019.  These tax cuts will fulfill a promise we made to Canada’s small business owners and, more importantly, make sure that they can keep more of their hard-earned money to invest back into their businesses, their employees, and their communities. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to participate in events across the country to celebrate Small Business Week.  I thank the Business Development Bank of Canada for their annual organization of this special week and wish them every success with this year’s activities. Today, we celebrate Persons Day, a turning point for women’s rights in Canada.  On this day in 1929, women were finally recognized as ‘persons’ and won the right to be appointed to the Senate. Five determined women from Alberta won this groundbreaking victory that defined the future of our country.  Emily Murphy, Nellie McClung, Irene Parlby, Louise McKinney, and Henrietta Muir Edwards – known as the Famous Five – fought for two years to expand women’s rights and extend the reach of their voices.  In its final decision, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council of Great Britain, Canada’s highest court of appeal at that time, rightly noted that ‘the exclusion of women from all public offices is a relic of days more barbarous than ours. ’ With those words, democracy in Canada took a major step forward. The Famous Five were trailblazers for social justice.  Their victory was one of many milestones in the push for gender equality and for a more just world.  Thanks to their efforts, and to those of many others, we have made important progress – but we have much more work to do to make gender equality a reality in Canada and around the world. It is unacceptable that women and girls around the world do not have the same opportunities as men and boys, and struggle to receive the recognition they deserve.  All of us benefit when the rights of women and girls are protected, and their voices are heard – and each of us has a role to play to build a truly gender equal world. That is why gender equality is a priority that drives all of our actions as a Government.  It is why we are working to strengthen women’s leadership in our own Cabinet and our appointment process, while facilitating new opportunities more broadly in business and government.  It is why we have committed to implement pay equity legislation, and why we have made empowering women and girls the focus of our international assistance policy.  Women’s voices matter, women’s rights are human rights, and all of us are affected by the challenges we face as a world.  To meet those challenges, we must ensure that all people – no matter their gender identity – feel empowered to speak up and be active in all areas of our society. On Persons Day, we pay tribute to five women who fought to make us a more inclusive and equal country.  Their work paved the way for subsequent generations to continue their push for equality and justice.  It is up to all of us, no matter our gender identity, to carry on their important work and make gender equality a reality in Canada and around the world. For almost five decades, Gord Downie uncovered and told the stories of Canada.  He was the frontman of one of Canada’s most iconic bands, a rock star, artist, and poet whose evocative lyrics came to define a country. The Tragically Hip’s music invited us to explore places we had never been – from Mistaken Point to Churchill – and helped us understand each other, while capturing the complexity and vastness of the place we call home. Gord’s command of language was profound.  He painted landscapes with his words, elevating Canadian geography, historical figures, and myths.  When he spoke, he gave us goosebumps and made us proud to be Canadian.  Our identity and culture are richer because of his music, which was always raw and honest – like Gord himself. In the wake of his diagnosis, Gord only fought harder for what he believed in: social justice, environmentalism, and reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples.  Before passing, he shined his light on the story of 12-year-old Chanie Wenjack who died from hunger and exposure after trying to find his way home from a residential school.  For his work raising awareness of Indigenous issues, he was inducted as a member of the Order of Canada in 2017. Gord did not rest from working for the issues he cared about, and his commitment and passion will continue to motivate Canadians for years to come. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to Gord’s family, friends, bandmates and crew members, and his many, many fans.  He will be sorely missed. Today, students across Canada and around the world will gather to mark Global Dignity Day. Every person has the potential to transform the world around them for the better.  No matter our age, sexual orientation, gender identity, or background, we all deserve to lead a dignified life.    The Global Dignity movement inspires young people to be their best selves, and reminds us all of our value, worth, and potential.  The challenges we face as individuals are as unique as we are.  Today is an opportunity to celebrate those who stand up for their rights and convictions, despite these challenges and because of them. Young people everywhere are making a difference.  They are willing to lead, and as courageous as they are curious.  Their passion and openness push us further and faster on the path toward a more just, equal, and sustainable world. As one of Global Dignity’s National Role Models, I encourage Canadians to promote dignity for all, not only today, but every day.  As the preamble to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states, ‘recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice, and peace in the world. ’On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite Canadians to participate in Global Dignity Day events across the country.  I thank the Global Dignity Organization and its partners for organizing this special day and congratulate everyone involved. Today Hindu, Sikh, Jain, and Buddhist communities in Canada and around the world celebrate Diwali and Bandi Chhor Divas.  It is a time to celebrate the triumph of good over evil, and the power of knowledge and hope to dispel ignorance and despair. Diwali brings people together from diverse communities in a spirit of respect and inclusion.  This year’s celebration feels especially meaningful, on the 150th anniversary of Confederation and the 35th anniversary of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Diversity is our greatest strength.  Today, let us take the time to recognize the invaluable contributions that Hindu, Sikh, Jain, and Buddhist Canadians make to our country every day. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish a joyful Diwali and Bandi Chhor Divas to all those celebrating. I would like to congratulate the Labour Party’s leader, Jacinda Ardern, on forming the next government of New Zealand.  I look forward to working very closely with Ms.  Ardern.  We have the opportunity to bring our two countries even closer together as we tackle the common issues that face both Canadians and New Zealanders. Whether it is addressing climate change or deepening trade relationships that create real benefits for everyone, Canada and New Zealand have a great deal to share and learn from each other.  We already cooperate closely at the United Nations, the Commonwealth, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum, and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional Forum, and we will continue to look for new opportunities to make our relationship even stronger. I learned with great sadness today that one of Canada’s most devoted and longest-serving public servants has passed away. Michael joined the public service in 1959.  Over the next fifty years, he would serve Canadians in a variety of roles, most notably as Secretary to the Cabinet, as Clerk to the Privy Council, and as the Senator for Ottawa-Vanier.  He remains the youngest ever Canadian to lead the public service. His contributions to Canadian public life are far-reaching and enduring.  Throughout his career, Michael challenged the status quo, knowing Canadians could be better served by their federal government and public service.  He oversaw the introduction of new Cabinet committee systems and government processes, many of which continue to shape government decision-making today.  He also helped lay the foundation for a more efficient, modern public service – now considered the best in the world. Michael played a pivotal role in the patriation of the Constitution and the establishment of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  He was a tireless advocate of bilingualism and national unity whose leadership helped bring us closer as a country and make our democracy uniquely our own. On a personal level, I will remember Michael as a family friend, who was especially dear to my father and our family. In 1982, Michael joined the Senate of Canada, sitting as an independent until his retirement in 2010.  In recognition of his work, he was appointed Federal Queen’s Counsel, Commander of the Royal Victorian Order, and made a member of the Queen’s Privy Council. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to his three children, Caroline, Tom, and Kate, and to all of Michael’s family and friends. Three years ago today, a senseless attack at the National War Memorial and Parliament Hill in Ottawa claimed the life of ceremonial honour guard Corporal Nathan Cirillo and injured several others.   On this solemn anniversary, I join Canadians across the country to remember and pay tribute to Corporal Cirillo and to Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent, who was killed two days earlier that year in a terrorist attack in Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, Quebec.  We offer our deepest sympathies to their families and friends, and to all those affected by these attacks. Today, we also honour the bravery of the first responders – the Senate Protective Service and the House of Commons Security Services, the RCMP, former House of Commons Sergeant-at-Arms Kevin Vickers, and medical personnel – who kept us safe on that tragic day. These attacks were intended to instill fear and divide Canadians.  Instead, they only served to unite us.  We emerged stronger than before, showing the world that our most cherished values – freedom, democracy, diversity, and inclusion – will always triumph over fear and hatred. As we mourn today the loss of these two members of the Canadian Armed Forces, I invite all Canadians to thank our courageous men and women in uniform – both here at home and abroad – who put their lives in harm’s way every day to defend our country and keep us safe. Today, we join the Bahá’í community in Canada and around the world to celebrate the 200th anniversary of the birth of Baha’u’llah, the prophet and founder of the Bahá’í faith. Baha’u’llah’s teachings aim to inspire respect, as well as to promote diversity and inclusion, gender equality, and education for all – values that we hold dear as a country. Canada’s diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride.  This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I invite all Canadians to reflect on how they can put into practice these values of openness and respect.     Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating this historic milestone for the Bahá’í faith.  On behalf of the Government of Canada, I congratulate Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on his victory in yesterday’s general election in Japan. Canada and Japan are close partners with deep ties and shared values.  We are both dynamic, prosperous democracies with citizens eager to thrive in the global economy. I look forward to continue working closely with Prime Minister Abe on a progressive trade agenda that will create good, middle class jobs on both sides of the Pacific and make it easier for Canadian and Japanese businesses to trade goods and services with one another. We will continue our close cooperation on security and defence, including measures to press North Korea to halt its nuclear and ballistic missile tests, which pose serious threats to international peace and security. Canada and Japan understand that many of the challenges we face as countries, we face as a world.  We collaborate closely as members of the G7, the United Nations, and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.  We are united in the fight against climate change, and will continue to face pressing global issues together. Never before has the world been so interconnected.  As more and more people are connected, so are the challenges we face.  Challenges, such as climate change, do not recognize borders.  They threaten all of our futures, no matter where we call home. Since its inception, the United Nations (UN) has played an invaluable role in bringing the international community together to face these challenges, promote peace and human rights, and drive social progress around the world. Canada has a storied past working to make the UN a stronger and more effective institution.  Canadian leadership helped draft the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, resolve the Suez Canal crisis, and lay the foundation for peacekeeping missions.  As UN peacekeepers, thousands of Canadians have put their lives on the line to protect those most vulnerable. Today, Canada continues to work closely with the UN to meet the challenges of the 21st century.  When I addressed the UN General Assembly last month, I made clear that Canada is committed to implementing the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) at home and abroad. The achievement of the SDGs hinges on delivering economic growth that benefits everyone, empowering women and achieving gender equality, and taking ambitious action on climate change.  We have a responsibility to future generations to not only achieve these goals, but to do so in a way that leaves no one behind. On this day, I invite Canadians to reflect on all that the UN has accomplished for humanity, and celebrate the employees of its many affiliated programmes, funds, and specialized agencies who work tirelessly every day toward a better world. I am deeply grieved to hear of today’s terrorist attack in New York City.  Canadians join me in offering our sincere condolences to those mourning the loss of family members and friends.  We also send our wishes for a full recovery to those who were injured. New York is known for its resilience and strength, and we know that New Yorkers will stand together as they always have in the face of difficult situations. Tonight, we offer our prayers and thoughts to our neighbours in the United States.  We are with you, as always, as friends and allies. Today, I had the honour of meeting with the Modern Treaty and Self-Governing First Nations to celebrate and reinforce our unique and enduring relationship. We know that our national journey to reconciliation requires systemic changes that recognize the right to advance self-determination and self-government.  Modern treaties and self-government agreements are examples of reconciliation in action. Today, we talked about the strides taken toward self-determination, and our shared desire to ensure Indigenous governments continue to thrive for the benefit of Indigenous communities and all Canadians.  We know that we need to speak openly and honestly about our common goals so we can find solutions that respond to the specific needs and circumstances of different peoples and different communities. I was inspired to hear from Indigenous governments taking concrete steps to manage their lands and resources, and to promote the social and economic health and sustainability of their communities.  This work greatly benefits their communities and the country as a whole. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank the Modern Treaty and Self-Government partners for meeting today under the shared desire to build a better future for our children and grandchildren.  Working together, we will continue to forge a new government-to-government relationship built on recognition of rights, respect, collaboration, and partnership. On this day, we join Sikh communities in Canada and around the world to celebrate the birth of Guru Nanak Dev Ji, founder of Sikhism. Guru Nanak Dev Ji fought against discrimination and prejudice, and preached a message of ‘equality for all,’ regardless of religion, background, or gender. His teachings of unity and openness are just as relevant today.  They remind us that diversity is a strength, and that all of us have a role to play to make our world more just and inclusive. Today, Sikh Canadians continue to honour and uphold these important values, and their contributions help make Canada a stronger country and a better place. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I offer our warmest wishes to everyone celebrating the anniversary of the birth of Guru Nanak Dev Ji. I am saddened that so many have been killed and injured in a senseless and horrific act of violence against innocent people in Texas. On behalf of all Canadians, I extend my deepest condolences to the families and friends of those killed.  We also hope for a speedy recovery to all those harmed today. It is appalling that this act took place in a place of worship, where worshippers should have felt safe. Canada as a nation stands in solidarity with the United States during this difficult time. Today, we mark the 100th anniversary of the end of the Battle of Passchendaele.  On this solemn anniversary, we honour the thousands of Canadians who fought and died there, and pay tribute to their great courage and sacrifice. The Battle of Passchendaele has come to be a symbol of the worst horrors of the First World War.  It began in the summer of 1917, as Allied soldiers sought to open a path through Western Belgium to coastal enemy bases.  For months, Allies and enemies alike fought in conditions many described as a living hell; a landscape already broken by years of warfare; mud that swallowed men and horses, but refused to bury the dead. The Canadians joined the battle in October of that year.  For weeks, they endured incessant rain and shellfire – but by mid-November, they had taken the ridge. Our soldiers fought an impossible fight with perseverance, valour, and commitment to a greater cause.  Nine Canadians would earn the Victoria Cross for their bravery.  Yet the battle came at a devastating cost.  16,000 Canadians were killed or wounded – and thousands of families forever changed. On this solemn anniversary, we honour the great heroism and sacrifice of those who fought in the Battle of Passchendaele.  Tomorrow, please pause to remember and honour those who have served, and continue to serve, so that we may live in peace. Lest we forget. Today, we mark the 100th anniversary of the end of the Battle of Passchendaele.  On this solemn anniversary, we honour the thousands of Canadians who fought and died there, and pay tribute to their great courage and sacrifice. The Battle of Passchendaele has come to be a symbol of the worst horrors of the First World War.  It began in the summer of 1917, as Allied soldiers sought to open a path through Western Belgium to coastal enemy bases.  For months, Allies and enemies alike fought in conditions many described as a living hell; a landscape already broken by years of warfare; mud that swallowed men and horses, but refused to bury the dead. The Canadians joined the battle in October of that year.  For weeks, they endured incessant rain and shellfire – but by mid-November, they had taken the ridge. Our soldiers fought an impossible fight with perseverance, valour, and commitment to a greater cause.  Nine Canadians would earn the Victoria Cross for their bravery.  Yet the battle came at a devastating cost.  16,000 Canadians were killed or wounded – and thousands of families forever changed. On this solemn anniversary, we honour the great heroism and sacrifice of those who fought in the Battle of Passchendaele.  Tomorrow, please pause to remember and honour those who have served, and continue to serve, so that we may live in peace. Lest we forget. Today, we join Polish communities in Canada and around the world to celebrate Poland’s Independence Day. Nearly one million people of Polish descent live in Canada.  Our two countries share a lasting bond based on close people-to-people links, common values, and mutual respect. Poland and Canada fought together as allies during the Second World War.  Today, we work together within multilateral organizations such as the United Nations and NATO, and are partners in progressive trade thanks to the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement.  Our ongoing cooperation is based on mutual respect for democracy and human rights. Last week, we celebrated the 150th anniversary of the first sitting of the House of Commons.  That also marked the first time a Polish Canadian, Alexandre-Edouard Kierzkowski, was elected to our House of Commons. As we continue to mark 150 years of Confederation, we celebrate the many cultures and communities that make Canada such a great place to live.  Polish Canadians continue to help make Canada the strong, vibrant, and inclusive country it is today. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating Poland’s Independence Day. This week, we celebrate Global Entrepreneurship Week, a time for entrepreneurs, innovators, investors, and collaborators from around the world to connect, share ideas, and get inspired. Entrepreneurs grow our economy, build a strong middle class, and create good, well-paying jobs for people across Canada and around the world.  On Global Entrepreneurship Week, we celebrate their creativity, hard work, and vital contributions to our communities and economy.  Canada’s innovators are people of every gender, age, and background.  They drive progress and prosperity in every sector and industry, and shape a better future for all of us. The Government is working hard to help Canadian entrepreneurs turn their ideas into thriving businesses and create good jobs.  We know that a skilled and entrepreneurial workforce is critical to drive economic growth in Canada.  With Budget 2017, we made important investments in innovation, young entrepreneurs, and skills training to help both workers and businesses succeed in a changing economy. Last month, we announced that we intend to lower the small business tax rate to ten per cent in 2018 and to nine per cent in 2019.  These tax cuts will help small business owners keep more of their hard-earned money to invest back into their businesses, their employees, and their communities.  With our plan to promote a creative Canada, we are also making important investments to support Canada’s cultural entrepreneurs – and our progressive trade agreements are helping to support innovation, open new markets, and create opportunities for Canada’s entrepreneurs. We are also working hard to help women entrepreneurs succeed, both in Canada and abroad.  The Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC) has made major investments to support women-owned businesses, recently surpassing targets with over $800 million in loans for women entrepreneurs over 30 months.  As part of its efforts, the BDC has also invested $50 million in women-led technology firms.  To help make sure women entrepreneurs in every part of the world have the tools they need to innovate and prosper, Canada has also pledged $20 million to the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative.  We know that women entrepreneurs create jobs, advance gender equality, and help build economies that work for everyone. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to celebrate Canada’s innovators and entrepreneurs.  Their hard work and bold ideas have driven prosperity throughout our country’s history, and have helped to grow the strong middle class at the heart of Canada’s success.  Today, we thank them for helping to build a stronger economy and a better country.  I also thank Futurpreneur Canada, the official host of Global Entrepreneurship Week in Canada.  Futurpreneur Canada has helped nearly 10,000 young people launch and grow businesses of every kind in every part of Canada, creating roughly 40,000 Canadian jobs over the years.  I wish them every success with this year’s activities. Today, we commemorate the life of Louis Riel, a fearless Métis leader, politician, and founder of the province of Manitoba. Louis Riel was a courageous and impassioned defender of minority rights and a key contributor to Canadian Confederation.  Today, we celebrate a man who envisioned – and fought for – a more diverse and more inclusive country. Last year, I promised that federal ministers and Métis Nation leaders would work together to advance meaningful reconciliation and solve important challenges.  Earlier this year, we took a significant step toward a renewed government-to-government relationship with the signing of the Canada-Métis Nation Accord.  This accord is a solid foundation on which to build a new partnership – one based on recognition of rights, respect, and co-operation. As we continue our journey of reconciliation, I encourage everyone today to honour the Métis people and recognize their many contributions to Canada. It was with sadness that I learned today of the death of Senator Tobias C.  Enverga Jr. , the first Filipino-Canadian appointed to the Senate. Senator Enverga served Canadians long before his appointment to the Senate in 2012, and was the first Filipino-Canadian elected to public office in the City of Toronto.  He was a tireless advocate for the Filipino community and people with disabilities, and founder of the Philippine Canadian Charitable Foundation. As a Senator, he continued to actively promote the values of multiculturalism, diversity, and inclusiveness.  He was well respected by colleagues in both Houses of Parliament. For his efforts, Senator Enverga was awarded the Diamond Jubilee Medal in 2012, and recognized by the President of the Philippines with the ‘Lingkod sa Kapwa Pilipino’ presidential award in 2008. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I offer our sincerest condolences to Senator Enverga’s wife Rosemer; to their three daughters, Rystle, Reeza and Rocel; and to Senator Enverga’s friends and colleagues. On National Child Day, we celebrate our children and young people, and make sure they have every opportunity to succeed and reach their full potential.  It is up to all of us to ensure children’s rights are protected, that they are protected from harm, and have a voice in issues that matter to them. The toughest issues of our time – fighting climate change, making gender equality a reality, building a fairer, more inclusive world – have no easy solutions.  These challenges demand a global response, shaped across borders, involving every generation.  Ultimately, success depends on our youngest leaders and their ability to lead – which starts with a safe and happy childhood. The Government of Canada is committed to making sure our children have the best possible start in life.  Through the Canada Child Benefit (CCB), we have put more money in the pockets of Canadian families to help them with the high costs of raising their children.  The CCB has helped lift 300,000 children out of poverty.  We will strengthen the CCB by increasing the benefits annually to keep pace with the rising cost of living, starting July 2018. Last March, we committed $7. 5 billion over 11 years to support early learning and child care and make high-quality, affordable child care available to more Canadian families.  As part of this investment, we will establish, in cooperation with Indigenous communities, a distinct Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Framework that reflects the unique cultures and needs of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis children. We remain committed to providing services to Indigenous children and families that better meet their needs.  To that end, we have established a new department focused on Indigenous services.  We will work together with Indigenous partners to transform services so that they are truly child-centred, community-directed, and focused on prevention, family preservation, and well-being. Our children deserve the very best.  We will continue to help build a better quality of life for future generations through investments that give young people better access to mental health services and help them afford post-secondary education and prepare for the jobs of today and tomorrow. Today, organizations all over Canada will host special events to commemorate National Child Day.  In Ottawa, more than 30 children and young people from across the country will gather for a National Summit to begin creating a Canadian Children’s Charter – a plan of action to respect, protect, and fulfil the rights of our children. Sophie and I invite all Canadians to join us in celebrating National Child Day.  Together, we must make sure children everywhere get the love, safety, and support they need to live a full childhood and pursue their dreams. On behalf of all Canadians, I offer my sincere congratulations to Paul Quassa on being chosen by the Nunavut Legislative Assembly to lead the territorial government. I look forward to working with Premier Quassa and the new government.  By coming together in a spirit of cooperation, I know we can deliver true, meaningful reconciliation between Canada and Indigenous Peoples, and bring about a better quality of life for Indigenous Peoples in Nunavut. The Government of Canada will continue to work with Indigenous, territorial, and provincial partners to co-develop a new Arctic Policy Framework that better reflects the needs and priorities of the North, and builds stronger, more sustainable communities in the region. I extend my sincere thanks to Peter Taptuna for his contributions to Nunavut and to Canada during his time as Premier.  I wish him all the best in his future endeavours. I am shocked and horrified by today’s terrorist attack in the al-Rawda mosque in Bir-Al-Abed, which killed and injured hundreds of worshippers. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the friends and families of the victims of today’s attack.  We hope for a complete and rapid recovery for all those injured. This senseless attack targeted people praying at their place of worship – a place where they should have felt safe and secure. Canada condemns this attack and stands shoulder-to-shoulder with the people of Egypt in this difficult time.  We offer our full support to the Government of Egypt, and we will continue to work closely with our allies and the international community to counter violent extremism that leads to such appalling acts. We must stand against these acts of terrorism and counter hate by promoting the values of diversity, inclusion, and peace. Today, we commemorate one of the darkest chapters in human history: the Ukrainian Holodomor of 1932-33.  This systemic and horrific genocide, undertaken by a totalitarian Soviet regime, killed millions of Ukrainian men, women, and children by starvation.  It was a failed attempt to destroy the identity and will of the Ukrainian people. We stand with the victims of the Holodomor and their descendants to remember and condemn this unconscionable act.  Remembering history is our best hope against repeating it. To honour the millions of people who suffered under communist regimes, the Government of Canada – in partnership with Tribute to Liberty – is building a Memorial to the Victims of Communism.  This memorial recognizes Canada as a place of refuge and highlights our history of welcoming people fleeing injustice and persecution. On this sombre anniversary, I invite all Canadians to take time today to remember the victims of the Holodomor, and to reflect on the remarkable contributions citizens of Ukrainian descent have made to our country. Today, we also reaffirm Canada’s unwavering support for the people of Ukraine, its sovereignty and territorial integrity, and reforms being undertaken by Ukraine’s government to bring greater security and prosperity to its people. Violence against women is a violation of human rights – and an issue that affects all of us.  We are all harmed when people in our communities and society experience violence – and all of us share a responsibility to make sure women and girls have the respect, protection, and freedom that is their right. Men must hold themselves and each other accountable and be part of the solution.  From speaking up about the rights of women and girls, to promoting women’s leadership in every aspect of our society, to standing against violence whenever it occurs, men have a vital role to play in eliminating gender-based violence. Ending gender-based violence means transforming a culture that devalues women and dismisses their voices.  Together, we must challenge the prejudices and inequalities that allow this violence to persist.  We know gender-based violence differently and disproportionately affects those most vulnerable – including trans women, Indigenous women, women of colour, low-income women, refugees and displaced women, and others.  To change this reality, we must actively seek out and listen to the voices and needs of women, especially those cast furthest to the margins. That is why the Government of Canada has adopted It’s Time: Canada’s Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence based on prevention, support for survivors and their families, and the promotion of responsive legal and justice systems.  It is also why the Government remains determined to seek justice for missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls and to prevent these tragedies from continuing to occur. Together with people across Canada and around the world, the Government is working tirelessly to eliminate violence against women and girls – but so much remains to be done. Today and throughout the 16 Days of Activism Against Gender-Based Violence, I encourage all Canadians to join the #MYActionsMatter campaign and find your way to combat violence against women. We are interdependent and interconnected, and we are stronger when everyone’s rights are protected.  Working together – as communities, businesses, governments, and individuals – I know we can build a world free from violence for women and girls everywhere. Canada condemns the migrant slave trade taking place in Libya.  The targeting of desperate migrants from Africa – vulnerable children, women, and men struggling to find a home and a place of rest – is abhorrent and despicable. Canada will not stay silent in the face of such inhumane atrocities.  While it is clear that the Libyan Government is investigating this horrific injustice, and humanitarian organizations have launched efforts to help the victims, more must be done to address the situation. We again call on all United Nations member states to implement and respect the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking, Especially Women and Children.  We must work together to recognize and protect the human rights and dignity of all people. The international community must take action to end the exploitation and trafficking of innocent people.  Canada will continue its work to eradicate human trafficking and support all international efforts to bring those who prey on vulnerable people to justice. On behalf of all Canadians, I congratulate the Toronto Argonauts on winning the 105th Grey Cup over the Calgary Stampeders in Ottawa, Ontario. What better way to celebrate Canada 150 than coming together on a crisp and snowy night in the nation's capital to watch the Grey Cup. The Grey Cup is one of Canada’s favourite traditions, and the pinnacle of Canadian football.  It has been part of Canadian sports since 1909, when Governor General Earl Grey donated the first Grey Cup to the Canadian Football League. I congratulate the City of Ottawa and the RNation for hosting the 105th Grey Cup.  I also thank both teams and the Canadian Football League for another memorable year and all they do to unite Canadians around sports. On World AIDS Day, we join people in Canada and around the world to show solidarity with people living with HIV, to remember those lost because of the virus, and to unite to end HIV/AIDS for good. Today is a chance to reflect on our global efforts to fight HIV/AIDS, and to celebrate the great strides we have made in prevention, testing, and treatment.  It is also a time to honour the people who, over decades and all around the world, fought for the rights of people living with HIV/AIDS and pushed for education, compassion, and care.  Now, we must continue to build on their work and end stigma, isolation, and HIV transmission – so that no one has to lose a loved one to this preventable, treatable condition. The first week of December is also Aboriginal AIDS Awareness Week.  In Canada, Indigenous Peoples continue to be over-represented in the HIV epidemic, making up more than 10 per cent of all new infections.  The Government of Canada is committed to working with Indigenous partners and communities to build supportive environments and culturally appropriate approaches to meeting the needs of Indigenous Peoples in addressing HIV/AIDS. We know that HIV disproportionately affects the world’s poorest and most vulnerable – especially women and girls.  Advancing gender equality must be part of the solution.  We pledged $804 million during the Fifth Replenishment Conference of the Global Fund to fight AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria.  The Conference raised over $12. 9 billion in pledges, which will be instrumental in ending this devastating epidemic by 2030.  Together, we can make sure people living with HIV/AIDS have access to the treatment, care, and support they need. Together, let’s end it.  Let’s unite to end stigma and discrimination, end isolation, and end HIV transmission.  Today and every day, let’s stand with people living with HIV – and meet this global challenge together. The International Day of Persons with Disabilities is a time to celebrate the contributions that people with disabilities make to our country and our world.  It is also an opportunity to learn about what we can do so that everyone is able to fully participate in our communities and workplaces without barriers. This year’s theme – Transformation towards sustainable and resilient society for all – reminds us that resilient societies are inclusive societies.  We must acknowledge the leadership of people with disabilities, and work with them to address the challenges they face and to achieve the goals laid out in the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. While our country has made important progress toward advancing the rights of people with disabilities, Canada must continue to show leadership and actively promote diversity, equality, and inclusion – here at home and abroad.  That is why we are investing in programs like the 2017 Enabling Accessibility Fund, which will help enhance and ensure greater accessibility and opportunities for people with disabilities in our communities, schools, workplaces, sport facilities, and beyond. Our Government is committed to helping Canadians with disabilities or functional limitations fully participate in their workplaces and communities.  From July 2016 to February 2017, we consulted with people across the country on planned accessibility legislation.  We will use this feedback as we move toward tabling this legislation in early 2018. This year, the 150th anniversary of Confederation reminded us that our diversity that is our greatest strength.  All of us benefit when everyone’s rights are protected – and each one of us has a role to play to make inclusion a reality. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to join me in celebrating International Day of Persons with Disabilities.  Not just today, but throughout the year, I urge you to take action and help create a truly accessible, just, and inclusive world for all. Today, we mark the 100th anniversary of the Halifax Explosion. On the morning of December 6, 1917, in the midst of the First World War, the munitions ship SS Mont-Blanc and the freighter SS Imo collided in the narrows of Halifax Harbour.  The SS Mont-Blanc caught fire and erupted in an explosion that levelled the north end of Halifax – changing the city forever. It was the largest human-made explosion before the atomic bomb, and remains one of the deadliest disasters in Canadian history.  Nearly 2,000 people were killed in the blast, including hundreds of children.  Thousands more were gravely injured.  Half the city’s population was left without shelter in the immediate aftermath. The tragedy devastated Halifax, but Nova Scotians, like Vincent Coleman, responded with resilience and courage.  A railway dispatcher, Coleman gave his life to warn incoming trains of the danger.  Soldiers, sailors, police, firefighters, and hundreds of civilians rushed to the disaster zone to help the injured and rescue those trapped under debris.  Communities across the province and country offered support, and help poured in from friends beyond our borders – from Massachusetts to Australia.  Together, Nova Scotians recovered, rebuilt, and emerged stronger than before. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite Canadians to honour the memory of the victims of this terrible tragedy and those who came to Halifax’s aid.  As the 150th anniversary of Confederation draws to a close, let us reflect on this powerful example of Canadians overcoming hardship and tragedy with perseverance and compassion. Twenty-eight years ago, at l'École Polytechnique de Montréal, 14 young women were viciously murdered in a senseless and hateful act of violence.  On the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women, we mourn with their families and friends, and pay tribute to the women whose future was robbed from them. The tragedy at l’École Polytechnique was a devastating reminder of what can happen when hatred and misogyny prevail.  Yet almost thirty years on, gender-based violence continues to affect the daily lives of women and girls everywhere – in Canada and around the world. This is unacceptable.  We must find the courage to stand up and speak out against gender-based violence in all its forms.  That means valuing the voices of women and girls, fighting the injustices and inequalities that put the most vulnerable women at the greatest risk of violence, and breaking down a culture that dismisses women’s worth – from Hollywood studios to the halls of Parliament.  Every single one of us, no matter our gender identity, can and must be part of the solution to stop violence before it starts. The Government of Canada is taking action through our Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence.  This strategy – which includes nearly $100 million in funding over five years and $20 million per year on an ongoing basis – focuses on prevention, support for survivors and their families, and responsive legal and justice systems.  We are also investing in the construction and renovation of shelters and transition houses for victims of family violence.  Our work to promote women’s leadership in government and business, and to prioritize gender equality in our decision-making at home and abroad, is part of a cultural shift towards valuing women’s voices. As we mourn with the loved ones of the women so senselessly lost, I invite all Canadians to reflect on how each of us can help eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls.  Our actions matter.  Each of us has the power to make our world more just and more gender-equal.  Today, let us move forward together to build a future where everyone’s rights are protected, and everyone’s voices are heard. Today, Orthodox Christians around the world will gather with family, friends, and loved ones to celebrate Christmas. This joyful time of year is an opportunity to appreciate the many blessings we enjoy here in Canada.  We are fortunate to live in a country where cultural and religious diversity are considered tremendous strengths, not weaknesses.  I invite all Canadians to take this time to reflect on the values we cherish most, and to lend a helping hand to those in need. In the weeks and months ahead, Canada will continue to receive thousands of Syrian refugees.  I am certain that these new arrivals will be granted a warm and compassionate welcome from Canadians across our great country, in keeping with our values of kindness and generosity. On behalf of Sophie and our three children, I wish you and your family a blessed Christmas.  May the new year be filled with peace, health, and happiness for all. Today, Tamils both in Canada and around the world come together with friends and family to celebrate Thai Pongal, the four-day Tamil harvest festival. As the harvest season comes to an end, each day of this festival has its own special meaning and traditions which are tied to abundance, peace and happiness. Thai Pongal reminds us of the many cultures and traditions that we are privileged to enjoy here in Canada.  Our rich diversity is a source of strength, which should be cherished and celebrated. This is also a time for all Canadians to recognize the important contributions the Tamil community has made and continues to make across our country. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating Thai Pongal a joyful harvest festival. Canada strongly condemns the deadly terrorist attacks that took place in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. On behalf of all Canadians, we offer our deepest condolences to the families, friends and colleagues of all those killed and a speedy recovery to all those injured.  We are deeply saddened by these senseless acts of violence on innocent civilians. We have offered assistance to the Burkinabé authorities in their investigation of this terrible crime. Today we pay tribute to Raoul Wallenberg, a remarkable hero whose courage and compassion rescued thousands of Hungarian Jews from persecution at the hands of fascist regimes during the Second World War. As a Swedish diplomat, Mr.  Wallenberg provided many Jewish people living in Budapest with special ‘protective passports’ that saved them from deportation to concentration camps.  He also created a network of safe havens, which operated under the Swedish flag.  These safe houses, hospitals, and child care centres rescued many more lives and offered desperately-needed refuge to those fleeing persecution. Tragically, Raoul Wallenberg was captured by Soviet forces in the final stages of the war.  His fate remains unknown, but his heroic achievements have since been celebrated internationally.  Many awards, monuments, institutions, forests, and anti-racism campaigns have been named after him.  In Canada, he was granted honourary citizenship in 1985, and a stamp was issued in his honour in 2013. On Raoul Wallenberg Day, I encourage all Canadians to join me in remembrance of Mr.  Wallenberg’s courageous achievements and his great humanitarian legacy. I learned with deep sadness and shock today about the shooting at a high school and another location in Saskatchewan that involved multiple deaths and injuries. I was immediately in touch with the Minister of Public Safety, the Hon.  Ralph Goodale, and the Commissioner of the RCMP, Bob Paulson, and am receiving regular updates on the situation. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer the families and friends of the victims our deepest condolences on this darkest of days.  Our hearts and prayers are also with those injured in the attack, that they may have a full and speedy recovery. I wish to thank first responders—law enforcement and medical personnel— who managed this very difficult situation with bravery and professionalism. On this sad day the whole country grieves with the people of La Loche and of Saskatchewan. Today, I had the honour of meeting with Inuit leaders from across the North to discuss the unique challenges their communities face and the exciting opportunities the region holds. This afternoon’s discussion with members of the Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami was an important step in renewing the relationship between Canada and the Inuit – one based on respect, rights, cooperation, and partnership. A key part of our meeting focused on how we can better work together with Inuit leaders, the territories and provinces, along with other parties, to address issues important to the Inuit, including the social and economic obstacles that directly affect Inuit success. I want to thank leaders of the Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami for meeting with me today and giving me the opportunity to begin to earn their trust.  I am eager to bring about positive change in the lives of Inuit across Canada and work together to unleash the North’s amazing potential. On this day, we pay tribute to the memory of the millions of victims murdered during the Holocaust.  We honour those who survived atrocities at the hands of the Nazi regime, and welcome their courageous stories of hope and perseverance. The Holocaust is a stark reminder of the dangers and risks of allowing hate, prejudice, and discrimination to spread unchallenged.  It also reminds us that silence must never be an option when humanity is threatened. As we pause to educate ourselves and our families on the bitter lessons of the Holocaust, we also strengthen our resolve to work with domestic and international partners to continue defending human rights and condemning intolerance. Today, we celebrate a very special anniversary in our country’s history: exactly 100 years ago, women in Manitoba became the first women in Canada to gain the right to vote. This victory played a crucial role in shaping the Canada we know and love – a Canada where acceptance, equality, and respect are integral parts of who we are and what we stand for.  While we have made progress towards gender equality, we still have a lot of hard work to do.  We know that far too many women in Canada – and around the world – continue to face discrimination. These brave suffragettes led by example then, and they continue to inspire us now – all Canadians, women and men alike, should be proud to call themselves feminists.  We remain committed to advancing gender equality so that our society is one where all women and girls can reach their full potential. Together, we can, and will, continue to push for true equality between men and women, right here in Canada and around the world. Today, I will visit La Loche, Saskatchewan, to personally express the country’s shock and sadness over last week’s tragic shootings. It is both heartbreaking and devastating when lives so full of promise are taken from us too soon.  On January 22nd, four Canadians were senselessly killed.  Seven more were injured, and the lives of countless others were altered by these terrible events. I would like to extend my most heartfelt sympathies to the families of the victims, and I would like to wish a rapid recovery to all those injured.  Together, as a country, we join in mourning with the people of La Loche. I look forward to personally thanking the first responders – the RCMP and medical personnel – for their courage and professionalism.  I have also been deeply moved by the courage of the families and friends of the victims, the mental health workers, the school’s personnel and students, the mayor, and Indigenous leaders. February is Black History Month, a time to acknowledge and celebrate the many achievements and contributions that Canadians of African and Caribbean heritage have made to our great country.  This year, we mark the 20th anniversary of Black History Month in Canada.  Throughout our history, Black Canadians have played a key role in building and shaping the diverse, free, and prosperous country that we enjoy today.   The Government of Canada’s theme for this year’s Black History Month is A Story of Courage – The Road to Canada 150.  As Canada prepares to celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation in 2017, we invite everyone to celebrate the bravery and strength that Black Canadians have shown over the course of our history. Black History Month also reminds us that our nation’s greatest strength is its diversity.  I encourage all Canadians to take part in the events and activities that take place in their communities – to honour the legacy of Black Canadians and our country’s heritage. As Canadians, we are defined by our compassion, our generosity, and our ingenuity.  Nowhere are these qualities more evident than in our international development workers and volunteers.  These Canadians work tirelessly at home – and around the world – to reduce poverty and inequality. Moving forward, the Government of Canada will be refocusing development assistance on helping the world’s poorest and most vulnerable.  Our efforts will be guided by the principles of innovation and effectiveness, as we strive to make Canada’s approach to development something that we can all be proud of. During International Development Week, I encourage all Canadians to learn – and draw inspiration from – those who do so much to make our world a safer and more compassionate place to live. Vietnamese communities in Canada and around the world will come together this week to celebrate T?t Nguyên Ðán, known as the Lunar New Year.  This year marks the arrival of the year of the Monkey. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Canadians of Vietnamese origin for the important contributions they make to our country every day.  Your vibrant community is an example of Canadian diversity, one of our country’s greatest strengths. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating T?t a year filled with prosperity, health, and joy. Chúc m?ng nam m?i. Today, Canadians of Korean descent will celebrate Seollal and welcome the year of the Monkey. Seollal is a time to reflect on the year that has passed, recognize good fortune, and look optimistically to the year ahead.  Korean Canadians – and around the world – will pay their respects to their elders and ancestors, visit with family and friends, and enjoy traditional feasts. As we mark the New Year, let us also reflect on the immense contributions of Canadians of Korean descent that have helped make Canada the strong and diverse country that it is today. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating the New Year health, prosperity, peace, and happiness. ?? ? ?? ????This week, Canadians of Chinese descent will celebrate the New Year— and welcome the arrival of the year of the Fire Monkey, an animal that symbolizes cleverness, wittiness, intelligence, and curiosity. As friends and families come together in shared hope for a prosperous year to come, we take this moment to recognize the valuable contributions Canadians of Chinese origin have made to our country.  We know that Canada is a strong and resilient nation because of its diversity. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those marking this occasion a very happy New Year. Gong Xi Fa Cai! Gong Hey Fat Choy! Gong Xi! Gong Xi!When we were elected, we promised real change to improve the lives of Canadians – change based on what people from coast to coast to coast have told us they want.  After the first 100 days, I am proud of the progress we have made towards that goal. As one of our first orders of business, we cut taxes for the middle class.  We asked the wealthiest Canadians to pay a little more, so that more money could be put back into the pockets of middle class Canadians. In November, I was extremely proud to introduce our gender-balanced Cabinet.  We know our country is enriched – and our government is more effective – when decision-makers represent Canada’s rich diversity. Our government also began the important consultations to design a framework for an inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls.  Indigenous communities demand answers and they deserve justice. Together, we have demonstrated global leadership by welcoming thousands of Syrian refugees into our homes and our communities.  These new Canadians will make great contributions to our country, and the extent to which Canadians have come together to lend a hand is nothing short of inspirational. We have also made important investments in innovative industries like regenerative medicine and clean water technologies.  We restored the long-form census, introduced legislation to bring fairness to Canadian labour laws, and have announced that we will re-open the Kitsilano Coast Guard base.  These are just a handful of our achievements after just 100 days in government. Today, I am happy to announce that our government will create an additional 35,000 summer jobs for students this year.  Through the Canada Summer Jobs program, we will invest up to an extra $113 million to help young Canadians get the valuable work experience they need. Youth unemployment has remained stubbornly high, and far too many young people have not been able to join the workforce.  Our government was elected on a promise to do something about this, right away, and that is exactly what we are doing. While I am excited about what we have accomplished in the first 100 days, I know there is still much to do to help Canadian families.  In the upcoming budget, we will continue with our plan to invest in strengthening the middle class with a new Canada Child Benefit and historic investments in job-creating infrastructure. Today, I join Canadians at home and abroad in celebrating the 51st anniversary of our national flag. The Maple Leaf is a powerful symbol that unites Canadians across the country and around the world.  It has been worn by our astronauts in space, by the brave women and men of the Canadian Armed Forces, and thousands of backpackers around the globe.  Our flag has been planted on Mount Everest, raised over Olympic podiums, and proudly flown at our embassies. No matter where the Maple Leaf flies, our flag represents the values that our country holds most dear: peace, freedom, respect, compassion, and diversity.  As Canada moves towards a greater leadership role in the world, I am confident that our flag will remain synonymous with these cherished Canadian values. On this important day, I invite all Canadians to take part in Canadian Heritage’s ‘Share your Moment with the Flag’ Challenge, to celebrate our national flag and what it stands for. Today, I join the Métis people, Manitobans, and Canadians across the country to commemorate Louis Riel: a champion of minority rights, a Founder of Manitoba, and a key contributor to Canadian Confederation. Louis Riel made important sacrifices to defend the rights, the freedoms, and the culture of the Métis people.  The ideals that Louis Riel fought for – ideals of inclusiveness and equality – are now the very same values on which we base our country’s identity. As we work to renew a nation-to-nation relationship with the Indigenous peoples of Canada, including the Métis people, let us take a moment to reflect on the life of Louis Riel, and celebrate the many contributions of Métis communities to our great country. Today, we mourn the loss of Boutros Boutros-Ghali, former Secretary-General of the United Nations and of La Francophonie. Mr.  Boutros-Ghali led the United Nations during a tumultuous period in history as the world grappled with major crises in Rwanda, Somalia, and former Yugoslavia.  He was a champion for world peace, and charted a path for the United Nations focused on conflict prevention, peacemaking, and peacekeeping.  As the first Secretary-General of La Francophonie, he promoted the French language and culture in the world. Mr.  Boutros-Ghali’s legacy includes the major role he had in the successful negotiation of the1979 Treaty of Peace between Egypt and Israel, as well as his ground-breaking report ‘An Agenda for Peace’. On behalf of all Canadians, we extend our deepest condolences to Mr.  Boutros-Ghali’s family, friends, and colleagues. I learned with sadness today of the passing of former Alberta Premier Don Getty.  On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to his family, friends, colleagues, and to the people of the province. Mr.  Getty was a gifted politician, athlete, and businessman.  He guided Alberta through challenging economic times, was a strong proponent of Senate reform, and worked in close collaboration with Indigenous peoples across the province. Over his long career of public service, Mr.  Getty received many honours, including being made an Officer of the Order of Canada and a member of the Alberta Order of Excellence. Mr.  Getty was a tireless champion of strengthening Alberta’s presence in Canada.   His immense contributions to both the province and the country will be honoured and remembered. Canada's First Ministers today issued a joint communiqué following the First Ministers' Meeting and released a declaration on clean growth and climate change:In the spirit of cooperation and collaboration, we met today to discuss the economy and actions to address climate change and agreed on immediate work to support growth and create new jobs. Building on commitments and actions already taken by provinces and territories and the momentum from COP21 in Paris, we are moving toward a pan-Canadian framework for clean growth and climate change that will meet or exceed Canada's international emissions targets, and will transition our country to a stronger, more resilient, low-carbon economy – while also improving our quality of life. We know that a fair transition to a sustainable, low-carbon economy is necessary for our collective prosperity, competitiveness, health, and security.  Taking smart and effective action today is essential for future generations.  These decisions will put Canada at the forefront of the global clean growth economy, and will create opportunities to diversify our economies, open up access to new markets, reduce emissions, and generate good paying, long-term jobs for Canadians. To achieve our goals, we will build on the leadership shown and actions taken by the provinces and territories, as exemplified by the 2015 Quebec Declaration. For its part, the Government of Canada committed to the following:support climate change mitigation and adaptation through investments in green infrastructure, public transit infrastructure and energy efficient social infrastructure;work together with the provinces and territories on how best to lever federal investments in the Low Carbon Economy Fund to realize incremental emission reductions;advance the electrification of vehicle transportation, in collaboration with provinces and territories;foster dialogue and the development of regional plans for clean electricity transmission to reduce emissions;advance efforts to eliminate the dependence on diesel in Indigenous, remote, and Northern communities – and use renewable, clean energy as a replacement; andas part of Canada's participation in Mission Innovation, double investments in clean energy, research and development over five years, and work with global partners to promote cleaner energy and better environmental outcomes. We will identify measures that governments can take to grow their economies and reduce emissions in the long term. To this end, we directed immediate work in four areas: clean technology, innovation, and jobs; carbon pricing mechanisms adapted to each province's and territory's specific circumstances and in particular the realities of Canada's Indigenous peoples and Arctic and sub-Arctic regions; specific mitigation opportunities; and, adaptation and climate resilience.  Four working groups will be established to report on these priorities.  Their reports including options will be submitted to the ministerial tables charged with overseeing their work and will be made public.  Ministers will review those reports and provide their recommendations to First Ministers by October 2016.  Those recommendations and the reports of the working groups will be used to develop the pan-Canadian framework for clean growth and climate change, a concrete plan that will also allow us to meet our international commitments. In addition, federal, provincial and territorial energy ministers will collaborate on work underway on energy efficiency and clean energy technology and innovation through the Council of the Federation's Canadian Energy Strategy, in order to contribute to the pan-Canadian framework on clean growth and climate change. We took stock of the economy and discussed real challenges facing Canadians as well as longer-term opportunities.  We have a shared objective to promote jobs and growth, address urgent economic needs, and support long-term growth in transitioning to a low-carbon economy. We recognize that making strategic investments in our economy to spur economic growth in the short term will benefit our economy and protect the environment.  That is why the federal government committed to fast-track existing infrastructure allocations in all provinces and territories, in addition to making significant new investments in infrastructure. We recognize the critical importance of fostering innovation, attracting investment, encouraging trade, and developing the skills of our workforce to create good jobs and grow the economy.  We have directed ministers to work together to advance these shared priorities. We also agreed to pursue necessary reforms to the Agreement on Internal Trade to benefit Canadians, as well as help Canadian businesses to grow their exports and be more competitive on the world stage. We agreed on the importance and urgency of moving Canada's resources to market in responsible, timely, predictable and sustainable ways that Canadians trust, based on robust science-based environmental assessments conducted within existing jurisdictional frameworks and that contribute to long-term economic growth and job creation. In the Vancouver Declaration on Clean Growth and Climate Change, we have outlined the vision and principles that will guide our governments as we move towards sustainable and clean economic growth.  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will work together to make this vision a reality.  We will work collaboratively with Indigenous peoples across the country to ensure a more sustainable and prosperous future for Canada.  We also recognize that businesses, civil society, and individual Canadians should be mobilized to achieve these goals. Building on our progress today, we are confident that we will tackle the short-term economic challenges and set the country on a path towards long-term clean growth, emissions reductions, and a more prosperous, green, and healthy future for all Canadians. On this special day, we celebrate the many achievements of women in Canada – and around the world – and we reaffirm our commitment to gender equality. While we have made enormous progress towards equality over the years, we know that we still have a lot of hard work to do.  Far too many women and girls continue to face injustices and discrimination. It is unacceptable that in 2016, women are still denied an education, forced into an early marriage, or made victims of gender-based violence.  As leaders, as parents, as community members, upholding women’s rights should be – and must be – a priority for us all. Canada’s theme for this year‘s International Women’s Day – Women’s Empowerment Leads to Equality – reminds us that we all benefit when women and girls have the opportunities and the resources they need to succeed. We remain committed to advancing gender equality, so that Canada can become a country where all women and girls can reach their full potential. Today, I encourage all Canadians to join me in celebrating International Women’s Day.  I also urge you to take part in the Government of Canada #YouAreEmpowerment campaign to honour a woman who has inspired you.  Today, President Obama and I had a very productive meeting that will help our countries transition to low-carbon economies, foster clean growth, and create good jobs and great opportunities for our citizens. The President and I agreed to formally join the Paris Agreement in the global fight against climate change, and to take ambitious actions to reduce methane, hydroflurocarbon, and greenhouse gas emissions. We announced a new partnership to build a sustainable Arctic economy, and we will work together to develop new, science-based standards for commercial fishing, low-impact shipping, sustainable development, and Arctic biodiversity. We also committed to make our borders more open and more secure, and we agreed in principle to expand preclearance to Billy Bishop Airport in Toronto, Jean Lesage International Airport in Quebec City, as well as rail service in Montreal and Vancouver. The President and I reaffirmed our commitment to streamline trade between our countries.  Each day, $2. 4 billion worth of goods and services cross the border.  We agreed to work in collaboration to bring trade and investment to new heights. Finally, we agreed that Canada will host the North American Leaders Summit in the Summer of 2016.  President Obama will address Parliament during his visit to Canada for the summit. Canada and the United States share the same values, the same origins, and the same space.  We face many of the same challenges, and we are all better off when we tackle them together.   On Commonwealth Day, we come together to recognize the common ties and shared values that unite the citizens of the 53 member countries. Our Commonwealth family spans Africa, Asia, the Americas, Europe, and the Pacific; it includes more than two billion people, and many different backgrounds, cultures, and languages. Canada remains committed to protect and promote the key principles of the Commonwealth: democracy, inclusivity, and accountable governance.  Moving forward, we will continue to promote human rights, advance the rights of women, and address discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity. Our shared history and values – outlined in the Commonwealth Charter – provide the foundation for our nations to tackle the challenges ahead.  In collaboration with our Commonwealth partners, we can ensure a brighter, better world for all generations to come. Today, we welcome the New Year as marked in the Persian Calendar and celebrate Nowruz. For thousands of years, Nowruz has been celebrated by Persian, Central Asian, Kurdish and Ismaili communities.  Marking the beginning of spring, it is an occasion for friends and family to come together over the haft seen table, exchange gifts, and enjoy traditional delicacies.  It is also a time to reflect on the values of peace, harmony, tolerance, and reconciliation.  Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and a source of pride.  As Nowruz brings together people of many different cultures, religions, and languages, let us take this time to recognize and celebrate the contributions of Persian, Central Asian, Kurdish and Ismaili Canadians across the country. On behalf of Sophie and my family, I wish a healthy, happy, and prosperous new year to all those marking Nowruz in Canada and across the world. Har Ruz etan Nowrouz, Nowruz etan Pyrouz. Today, we join Francophones around the world to celebrate the richness and diversity of the French language and culture.   For centuries, Francophone communities have added to the strength and prosperity of our country, and continue to contribute to our rich cultural and linguistic diversity. Canada’s long traditions of democracy, freedom, and inclusivity are rooted and reflected in our two official languages.  Official bilingualism is fundamental to our Canadian identity, and has helped us to become a society in which people from diverse cultures, origins, and religions can feel at home. On this International Day of La Francophonie, we celebrate our Francophone culture and heritage, as well as our deep ties to the global Francophone community.  Together, we will continue to build a better world based on the shared values of cooperation, solidarity, and diversity. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I extend my best wishes to everyone celebrating the International Day of La Francophonie, both here at home, and around the world. Today, I join Canadians – and people around the world – to recognize the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. As we approach Canada’s 150th birthday, we can look over our past and see how each successive generation of Canadians has fought to expand liberty to their fellow citizens who had been denied it. We have had deeply regrettable moments.  But the history of Canada is one in which we constantly challenge ourselves, and each other, one in which we fight racism and discrimination in order to protect equality and justice. We still have a lot of work to do.  Far too many people around the world continue to be denied their most basic human rights simply because of the colour of their skin, their faith, or their ethnic background.  On this day, I urge all Canadians to stand against racism and all forms of discrimination whenever and wherever they occur.  Diversity is at the very heart of Canada.  It is who we are and what we believe in. I am outraged and deeply saddened by the news that so many have been killed and injured in terrorist attacks targeting the people of Brussels, Belgium. Sophie and I join all Canadians in extending our deepest condolences to the families and friends of those killed.  We also hope for a fast recovery to all those who have been injured. Canada stands by Belgium in this difficult time and has offered all possible assistance.  We will continue to work closely with our allies and the international community to help fight and prevent terrorism here and abroad, and to bring to justice those who are responsible for planning and carrying out these senseless acts. Canadians mourn the loss of so many innocent victims.  Our thoughts and prayers are with the people of Belgium. Canadian citizens in Brussels requiring emergency consular assistance should contact the Embassy of Canada in Brussels at 32 (2) 741-0611 or call Global Affairs Canada’s 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre collect at +1 613 996 8885 or at +1 800 387 3124.  An email can also be sent to sos@international. gc. ca. Friends and relatives in Canada of Canadian citizens known to be in the area can contact Global Affairs Canada’s 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre by calling 613-996-8885 or 1-800-387-3124, or by sending an email to sos@international. gc. ca. This week, Canadians of Hindu faith will join their communities and loved ones in celebration of the fun-filled festival of colours. Holi marks the end of winter and the beginning of spring.  To usher in the new season, families will sing and dance, eat delicacies, light bonfires, and paint each other with brightly coloured powders and dyes. This happy holiday is an opportunity to renew friendships and celebrate peace, but it is also a time to reflect on traditional notions of good and evil, and the ultimate triumph of light over darkness.  It is a festival that is celebrated by Hindus and non-Hindus alike across Canada, South Asia, and around the world. As friends and families come together for this joyous occasion, we must take a moment to recognize the tremendous contributions Canadians of Hindu faith have made to our country.  Our diversity is our greatest strength. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those marking this occasion a fun, happy and colourful Holi. Holi Hai!Today at sunset, Jewish people in Canada and around the world will join their loved ones to celebrate Purim. On this joyous occasion, friends and families will come together to wear costumes, play games, feast on Hamantaschen, and exchange gifts. Traditionally, Purim recounts the story of Queen Esther and her uncle Mordecai, who saved the Jewish people of ancient Persia.  On this occasion, we are reminded of the strength of the Jewish people, who have survived and triumphed over unspeakable persecution. As we read the Megillah Esther, we reaffirm our ongoing responsibility to take action and stand against acts of anti-Semitism, and other expressions of hatred and discrimination, both here in Canada and around the world. On behalf of Canadians and our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a joyous Purim. Chag Purim Sameach!It was with great sorrow that I learned today of the death of Jim Hillyer, the Member of Parliament for Medicine Hat-Cardston-Warner. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I would like to express our deepest condolences to his wife Livi, their four children, and his friends and colleagues. The parliamentary community is a tight-knit one, and I want to say how much of a privilege it has been to serve with Jim.  I know he will be greatly missed on the Hill and in his constituency. Our thoughts and prayers are with his loved ones as they grieve this very sudden loss.  We will provide any support they need during this incredibly difficult time. This weekend, millions of Canadians and people around the world will join with friends and family to celebrate the Easter holiday. Easter is the holiest of Christian holidays, and marks the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. It is a sacred time for many, and an opportunity for us all to extend a helping hand to those in need, and to reflect on the notions of personal sacrifice and compassion that underlie the occasion. As we gather with those most important to us, let us put into practice what it truly means to love our neighbours as ourselves. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a very happy Easter.  We hope all Canadians, no matter their faith, find this a time of optimism, renewal, and new beginnings. I was saddened to learn yesterday of the tragic deaths of the Honourable Jean Lapierre, his wife, members of his family, and the flight crew in a plane crash on the Îles-de-la-Madeleine. As a former Member of Parliament, Minister, and media personality, Mr.  Lapierre devoted his life to public service.  His sudden death will leave a void in the political and media community – in Quebec and in the rest of Canada. I was fortunate to meet with Jean on many occasions in the past.  Our country will remember him as a skilled politician who was well known and loved by all.  The commitment and devotion he demonstrated throughout his career will stay in our memories. In these difficult times, we are reminded of just how precious life is.  We must live every day to the fullest and seize every moment that is given to us.  Sophie and I are devastated by these tragic events, and we extend our sincere condolences to all the victims’ families and friends. Today, after 39 years of service, my National Security Advisor, Mr.  Richard Fadden, will be retiring from the federal public service. During his exceptional career, Mr.  Fadden, Dick to friends and colleagues, was Deputy Minister of five different departments: National Defence; Canadian Security Intelligence Service; Citizenship and Immigration; Natural Resources; and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. On behalf of all Canadians, I wish Dick the very best in retirement and thank him for his distinguished record of service to his country. A woman’s right to choose is a fundamental right in our country. I welcome the leadership demonstrated by Premier MacLauchlan, who today announced that the PEI provincial government will move forward with access to reproductive services on the island. The Government of Canada reaffirms its belief that a woman should have access to reproductive health services, no matter where they live in our country.  The people of Saskatchewan have chosen to re-elect a government led by the Saskatchewan Party. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I offer my sincere congratulations to all elected Members of the Legislative Assembly, particularly Brad Wall who continues to have the honour and privilege to serve as Premier of this great province. I look forward to working with the Government of Saskatchewan in a spirit of cooperation and collaboration.  Today marks the anniversary of the founding of the World Health Organization (WHO), and highlights the global responsibility to promote better health. Each year, World Health Day raises awareness about a specific public health priority.  This year, World Health Day focuses on diabetes. More and more people are diagnosed with diabetes each year, especially in low- and middle-income countries.  Together with the WHO, the Government of Canada is committed to ongoing efforts to respond to this disease. We all have a role to play in the improvement of our physical and mental health, and the overall health of our communities.  When Canadians are healthy, they are happier, more productive, and can contribute more fully to our society. Today, I encourage all Canadians to learn more about diabetes, its widespread effects, and the steps we can take to halt its rise and lead a healthier life. The Battle of Vimy Ridge during the First World War was a moment that defined our nation. It was the first time that soldiers from all four Canadian divisions—representing every region of our country—fought side-by-side on the same battlefield.  As Brigadier-General Alexander Ross later said of Canada’s accomplishments at Vimy, ‘I witnessed the birth of a nation’. The capture of Vimy Ridge was one of the Great War’s most remarkable military victories, but it came at great cost.  Nearly 3,600 Canadians lost their lives and over 7,000 more were wounded. As we mark the anniversary of this historic battle, we are reminded of our obligation—to the fallen, to our Veterans, and to their families—that we must meet with respect and gratitude.  Our men and women in uniform have dedicated their lives to the defence of our country, and they deserve our unwavering support. On this day, let us thank those who have sacrificed—and those who continue to sacrifice—on behalf of our country so that we can enjoy the peace and freedoms we have today.  This week is National Volunteer Week, a time to celebrate and thank Canada’s 12. 7 million volunteers for the selfless work they do to help those around them. The theme for this year’s campaign—Volunteers are the roots of strong communities—recognizes that volunteers are at the heart of healthy and resilient communities. We each have the power to make the world a better place.  We can help a senior citizen who can no longer drive, mentor a young person in an after-school program, or welcome Syrian refugees to their new country.  Volunteers look for opportunities to contribute their time, passion, and skill to make a positive difference in the lives of others.  They believe—and know—that better is always possible. On behalf of all Canadians, I want to thank all the volunteers who every day accomplish extraordinary things and make Canada a great place to live. This week, the Sikh community in Canada and around the world will celebrate Vaisakhi, the holiest day in the Sikh calendar. Vaisakhi celebrates the creation of the Khalsa by Guru Gobind Singh Ji in 1699.  Friends and family will gather to read sacred texts at Gurdwaras and participate in lively Khalsa Day parades. Sikhism is rooted in teachings of equality, unity, selfless service and social justice – the very values which we all strive to incorporate in our daily lives.  Canada is proud to be home to one of the largest Sikh populations in the world, and we thank the community for the immense contributions it makes to our country. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating Vaisakhi a joyous celebration. Waheguru Ji Ka Khalsa, Waheguru Ji Ki Fateh. Today is New Year’s Day in the Tamil calendar, a day that will be celebrated in Canada and around the world. Puthandu, also known as Varusha Pirappu, is a time for family and friends to feast, to exchange gifts, and to pray for blessings for the year to come at temples and churches. As Tamils welcome the New Year, we are reminded of the many positive contributions that this community makes to our country.  Canada is strong because of the many diverse and vibrant cultures that come together to form the base of its identity. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I wish all Tamils who celebrate Puthandu a happy and prosperous New Year. Iniya Tamizh Puthaandu Nalvazhtukkal. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I offer my sincere congratulations to Brian Pallister and the Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba on their electoral victory. We look forward to working with the new provincial government in a spirit of cooperation and collaboration on issues of importance to Manitobans and all Canadians. I also extend my heartfelt thanks to Greg Selinger for his contributions to the province and the country during his time as Premier, and wish him all the best in his future endeavours. Today, Sophie, our children, and I join Canadians across the country to celebrate the 90th birthday of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada. I am deeply mindful of Her Majesty’s long and tireless service to the Commonwealth and its citizens.  Since Her Majesty acceded to the throne in 1952, Queen Elizabeth II has served with dignity, wisdom, and grace. Over the past 64 years, Her Majesty has stood with Canada through key moments of our country’s history and, as our nation underwent change and transformation, has been a rock of stability and a steadfast keeper of tradition. Today we admire her devotion to duty, and are thankful for her deeply-held affection for our country and unwavering loyalty to all Canadians. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II a happy 90th birthday, and continued health and happiness for many years to come. Today is Earth Day.  It is an opportunity for us to cherish and celebrate Canada’s natural beauty from coast to coast to coast.  We also take this day to reflect on the impact that each and every one of us can – and must have – on the world around us. We must protect our environment – clean air to breathe and clean water to drink means better health for all Canadians.  The Government of Canada has already demonstrated leadership and courage as it tackles climate pollution.  We have taken important steps with our partners to grow cleaner businesses, develop clean technologies, reduce the footprint of our resource sector, and protect our National Parks. Climate change is the great global challenge of our time, but it is also an opportunity for those willing to solve it.  Around the world, communities grapple with the complications of a rapidly changing environment.  Strong action is needed to address the issues we face – and build a cleaner, stronger, and more sustainable world. On this day, I encourage all Canadians to join us in our efforts to conserve and safeguard our natural environment.  Every single Canadian has a role to play to protect our earth and leave our children a better world than the one we inherited from our parents. Tonight at sundown, Jewish families across Canada and around the world will observe the beginning of Passover. Families and friends will gather around the Seder table to share food and wine, eat matzah, and recount from the Haggadah the timeless story of the Exodus – one of humanity’s great stories of liberation. Passover is a time to celebrate freedom, and reaffirm our commitment to face fear with hope, choose unity over division, and never lose faith in the better day that lies ahead. As friends and families gather for this joyous celebration, we take this opportunity to recognize the tremendous contributions of Canada’s vibrant Jewish community to our great country. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those observing Passover in Canada and around the world.   Chag Pesach Sameach!I am outraged by the news that a Canadian citizen, John Ridsdel, held hostage in the Philippines since September 21, 2015, has been killed at the hands of his captors. Canada condemns without reservation the brutality of the hostage-takers, and this unnecessary death.  This was an act of cold-blooded murder and responsibility rests squarely with the terrorist group who took him hostage. The Government of Canada is committed to working with the Government of Philippines and international partners to pursue those responsible for this heinous act and bring them to justice. On behalf of the Government of Canada and all Canadians, I would like to express my deepest condolences to the family and friends of Mr.  Ridsdel.  They have endured a terrible ordeal, and this is a devastating moment for all of them.  Our thoughts are with them as they come to terms with this loss, and I would ask that the media respect their privacy at this difficult time. The Government of Canada’s first priority is the safety and security of its citizens.  The Government of Canada will not comment or release any information which may compromise ongoing efforts or endanger the safety of the remaining hostages. This weekend, people of Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, and Eastern Catholic faith in Canada and around the world will gather with loved ones to celebrate Easter. On Sunday, friends and family will come together to enjoy the greatest of the feasts of the Orthodox Church – the feast of the Resurrection of the Lord. Easter is a time to mark the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ.  It is also an opportunity to show appreciation and gratitude for all of the many blessings we enjoy, and to think of how we can extend more compassion and humanity to others in our communities and around the world. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those who are celebrating a very joyful Easter. This week is Mental Health Week, an occasion for all Canadians to have a candid discussion about mental health and wellness and help put an end to the stigma around mental illness once and for all. In Canada and around the world, many suffer in silence with an illness that is invisible to others.  One in five Canadians will struggle with mental illness at some point in their lives.  Too often, they hesitate to seek the help and support they need out of fear of discrimination or shame. We all have a responsibility to raise our awareness about mental health.  We must actively encourage honest and open conversations – in our homes, our workplaces, and our communities – about what mental health is and what we can do to increase our collective well-being.  We must listen to our loved-ones, our colleagues, our friends, look out for signs and offer them support and advice in times of need.  It can be a challenge for all of us to cope with the fast pace of life, daily stresses, and obligations.  We all need to stand strong together. This week, we also thank those who have publicly shared their personal struggles with mental health – including my own mother, Margaret.  They are true examples of courage, bravery, and resilience.  Their stories help us all become more understanding, more compassionate, and more empathetic. Let us use our voices this week to help change the way society views mental health issues and those living with them.  Now is the time to GET LOUD for mental health. Tonight at sundown, Canadians and in particular, Jewish Canadians will commemorate the victims of the Holocaust.  Between 1933 and 1945, approximately six million Jews were systematically murdered by the Nazis.  Today, we honour the brave survivors, and recognize those who risked their lives to save others.  The rituals of Yom HaShoah hold tremendous meaning for the Jewish community and many other Canadians.  Tonight and tomorrow, in private homes, synagogues, and temples, families and friends will gather.  Many will light a memorial candle, sing, pray for the victims, and recount the stories of Holocaust survivors. Yom HaShoah is a time to reflect on the atrocities of one of the darkest chapters in human history.  On this day, we also reaffirm our commitment to Holocaust remembrance and education.  It is an opportunity to reiterate our steadfast commitment to fight anti-Semitism, racism, and all forms of discrimination – whenever and wherever they occur – so that such horrors never take place again. On behalf of Sophie and our family, I extend my thoughts and prayers to all those observing Yom HaShoah. Today, I speak for all Canadians when I say that our hearts go out to the families affected by this terrible fire.  We are thinking of – and praying for – the people of Fort McMurray.  Though Alberta’s loss is profound, we will get through this tragedy together: as friends, as neighbours, as Canadians. I encourage everyone to make a donation to www. redcross. ca , and help the thousands of displaced residents of Fort McMurray. The Government of Canada will match every dollar donated to the Canadian Red Cross in support of the Fort McMurray relief effort.  Our commitment will apply to individual charitable donations made within Canada, it will be backdated to May 3rd, 2016, and it will continue until May 31st, 2016.  There will be no financial cap on the federal government's contribution. We applaud the Government of Alberta, who has also agreed to match donations.  As a result, for every dollar donated by Canadians, the Red Cross will receive a total of $3. The outpouring of goodwill and compassion we have already seen from Canadians across the country has not only been inspirational, but stands as a testament to who we are as a nation. I would once again like to thank the many first responders who are working tirelessly, day and night, to fight this fire.  To those who have lost so much: we are resilient, we are Canadians, and we will make it through this difficult time, together. Today, we celebrate the 68th anniversary of the founding of the State of Israel with our Israeli friends and Jewish communities, both here in Canada, and around the world. The State of Israel is a thriving and vibrant country, which Canada is proud to call a close partner and steadfast ally. Canada and Israel unite in their people-to-people ties, shared values, respect for democracy, and growing trade relationship.  I look forward to continuing to strengthen our strong friendship. Although today is a joyous day, let us also reflect on the threat that Israel and its people continue to face throughout the world in the form of terrorist attacks, acts of anti-Semitism, and religious intolerance.  Canada stands with Israel and will continue to promote peace and stability in the region. On behalf of Sophie and our children, I wish everyone celebrating Israel’s Independence Day a Yom Ha’atzmaut Sameach.  Shalom. Today, I join Canadians – and people around the world – to recognize the International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia, and Biphobia. Everyone deserves to live free of stigma, persecution, and discrimination – no matter who they are or whom they love.  Today is about ensuring that all people – regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity – feel safe and secure, and empowered to freely express themselves. On this important day, I encourage all Canadians to raise awareness, and mobilize to end the violence, prejudice, and judgement faced by LGBTQ2 persons. As a society, we have taken many important steps toward recognizing and protecting the legal rights for the LGBTQ2 community – from enshrining equality rights in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms to the passage of the Civil Marriage Act.  There remains much to be done, though.  Far too many people still face harassment, discrimination, and violence for being who they are.  This is unacceptable. To do its part, the Government of Canada today will introduce legislation that will help ensure transgender and other gender-diverse people can live according to their gender identity, free from discrimination, and protected from hate propaganda and hate crimes. Today, let us unite in a global celebration of diversity, and reaffirm our commitment to unequivocally defend LGBTQ2 rights as human rights.  We will never stop fighting for a safer, more equal, and more just world for all of our children. Today, we mark the anniversary of the end of the war in Sri Lanka in 2009.  It is a time to honour, remember, and reflect on the victims of this 26-year war.  Over the past seven years, I have met many victims of this war, and have been deeply moved by their heroic stories of trauma and loss.  Much work lies ahead to heal the wounds of all those who have suffered, and to achieve long-term peace and reconciliation on the island.  Tamil-Canadians are an integral part of our country and have overcome much adversity.  I extend my deepest sympathy and support to Canadians of Tamil descent.   I am encouraged that the Sri Lankan government is committed to working with the United Nations Human Rights Council and the international community towards seeking accountability in their country.  A robust accountability mechanism must enlist the confidence of the victims of this war, through the meaningful engagement of foreign and Commonwealth investigators, prosecutors, and judges.  Canada will continue to engage the international community in investigating and addressing serious violations of international law in Sri Lanka and around the world.  We stand willing to assist the government of Sri Lanka in fulfilling this commitment.  Today, Buddhists in Canada and around the world will celebrate the birth, enlightenment, and passing of Gautama Buddha – the founder of Buddhism. On this day, Buddhists unite to reflect on the Buddha’s life and his teachings about showing compassion toward others.  Vesak is celebrated in many different ways in many different countries all over the world. Buddhists will visit their local temples to pray, donate to those in need, and put the teachings of the Buddha in practice.  They will also offer gifts to the Buddha statue to show respect and gratitude to the Buddha for his life and wisdom. As we celebrate the Buddha’s life and teachings, let us be inspired by his message, and continue to put the needs of others before our own.  Let us continue our work in pursuit of happiness, peace, and equality for all Canadians and people around the world. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those observing this sacred day. Today, we salute United Nations peacekeepers, past and present, who have dedicated their lives to the pursuit of peace, safety, and freedom for others.  They have greatly sacrificed to provide hope and security for the most vulnerable persons around the globe. Peacekeeping has a deep connection to Canadian values and leadership.  The first UN peacekeeping mission came about in large part due to the efforts of Lester B.  Pearson, our fourteenth Prime Minister, and the leadership of UN Forces Commander E. L. M.  Tommy Burns.  Together, their actions during the Suez Crisis of 1956 marked the beginning of Canada’s identity as a peacekeeping country. Since then, UN peace operations have evolved from separating belligerents and monitoring cease fires to protecting vulnerable populations and working to establish the conditions for durable peace.  As conflicts have grown in intensity and complexity, so too have the risks for UN peacekeepers who put their lives on the line for the safety of others.    On behalf of all Canadians, I commend UN peacekeepers for their selfless work and tremendous contributions to the advancement of global peace and human rights.  We will continue working with the UN to promote peace and the resolution of serious conflicts around the world. Effective immediately, the Honourable Hunter Tootoo has resigned from his position as Minister of Fisheries, Oceans and the Canadian Coast Guard. He will also be leaving the Liberal caucus. Mr.  Tootoo will be taking time to seek treatment for addiction issues. The Honorable Dominic LeBlanc will be assuming the role of Minister of Fisheries, Oceans and the Canadian Coast Guard later this evening, in addition to being Government House Leader. I learned with great sadness today that Len Marchand had passed away. Mr.  Marchand was a distinguished parliamentarian who held several senior positions including Parliamentary Secretary, Minister of State, Minister of the Environment and Senator.  He was much admired by my father. A member of the Okanagan Indian Band, Mr.  Marchand was a tireless champion for a stronger role for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis in Canadian political life, as well as justice for Indigenous Peoples.  He received several accolades for his work, including being appointed a member of the Order of Canada and the Order of British Columbia, and receiving the Queen Elizabeth II Golden Jubilee and Diamond Jubilee awards. Mr.  Marchand was a trailblazer for Indigenous involvement in Canadian politics and a champion of their rights.  His legacy will live on in those he inspired and helped. Len will be remembered for his strong convictions, his legendary sense of humour, and his tireless work to make Canada a better place for Indigenous Peoples. Muslims in Canada and around the world will embark upon a month-long spiritual journey of fasting, prayer, and reflection to commemorate the revealing of the Qu’ran to the Prophet Muhammad. During Ramadan, Muslims fast during daylight hours to increase their patience, closeness to God, and generosity towards those less fortunate.  It is a time of community, when Muslims invite neighbours and friends to share their evening meal – iftar – recite prayers together, and encourage each other to give to charity.  Ramadan reminds all of us to show appreciation for the countless blessings we enjoy and to put the needs of others before our own. Let us take the time to recognize, and show gratitude for, the invaluable contributions of our Muslim communities that enrich our national fabric each and every day.  Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those observing this holy month a blessed and peaceful Ramadan. Ramadan Mubarak!On behalf of all Canadians, I offer my deepest condolences to the family and friends of Gordie Howe, who passed away today at the age of 88.  Gordie Howe was an incredible athlete who relentlessly pushed the limits of the game.  His skill, toughness, dedication, and passion for hockey distinguished him as one of the greatest players in history. Throughout his five-decade long career, Gordie Howe won six Hart Trophies as the National Hockey League’s most valuable player, six Art Ross Trophies as the league’s leading scorer, and four Stanley Cups with the Detroit Red Wings. Gordie Howe was awarded the Order of Canada in 1971, and was inducted into 11 different halls of fame.  His records, accomplishments, and accolades are without parallel in the history of hockey.  He was truly one of a kind. We will remember the legend, the man, and the many exciting hockey moments he provided to fans throughout his career. Skate on, Mr.  Hockey.  You will be deeply missed. This National Public Service Week, I invite Canadians to join me in celebrating our federal Public Service. Every day, public servants work hard to strengthen the middle class and improve the lives of all Canadians.  Their commitment ensures that we receive the services we need, no matter the pressures they face or the challenges before them. The theme of National Public Service Week, ‘Proudly Serving Canadians,’ could not be more apt.  Since last November, my team and I have seen the passion and dedication of Canada’s public servants in every task and project that they undertake.  Whether helping resettle more than 25,000 Syrian refugees into Canada, or assisting the thousands of Canadians affected by the devastating wildfires in Fort McMurray, Canada’s public servants make a real difference – day in and day out – in the lives of Canadians and people around the world.   Our public servants understand that to remain focused on the people we serve, we must work together to make openness and transparency key values of our institutions.  They understand the need to renew and modernize so that together we can – effectively and efficiently – meet the needs of Canadians today and into the future. Now is also the time to build and promote a welcoming and healthy federal Public Service environment in which public servants can access the support they need in times of personal crisis.  A healthy workplace is a proud workplace – a dynamic, engaging, and appealing one to young Canadians looking for an exciting career that helps them make a real difference in the lives of others. To public servants, I say thank you for all that you do to help us tackle the real challenges that we face as a country.  You serve a vital role in our democracy, and are a source of pride and a model to other countries and governments.  It is truly a privilege to work with you every single day. I look forward to the great things we will achieve together for all Canadians. This National Public Service Week, I invite Canadians to join me in celebrating our federal Public Service. Every day, public servants work hard to strengthen the middle class and improve the lives of all Canadians.  Their commitment ensures that we receive the services we need, no matter the pressures they face or the challenges before them. The theme of National Public Service Week, ‘Proudly Serving Canadians,’ could not be more apt.  Since last November, my team and I have seen the passion and dedication of Canada’s public servants in every task and project that they undertake.  Whether helping resettle more than 25,000 Syrian refugees into Canada, or assisting the thousands of Canadians affected by the devastating wildfires in Fort McMurray, Canada’s public servants make a real difference – day in and day out – in the lives of Canadians and people around the world.   Our public servants understand that to remain focused on the people we serve, we must work together to make openness and transparency key values of our institutions.  They understand the need to renew and modernize so that together we can – effectively and efficiently – meet the needs of Canadians today and into the future. Now is also the time to build and promote a welcoming and healthy federal Public Service environment in which public servants can access the support they need in times of personal crisis.  A healthy workplace is a proud workplace – a dynamic, engaging, and appealing one to young Canadians looking for an exciting career that helps them make a real difference in the lives of others. To public servants, I say thank you for all that you do to help us tackle the real challenges that we face as a country.  You serve a vital role in our democracy, and are a source of pride and a model to other countries and governments.  It is truly a privilege to work with you every single day. I look forward to the great things we will achieve together for all Canadians. It is with deep sadness that I have reason to believe that a Canadian citizen, Robert Hall, held hostage in the Philippines since September 21, 2015, has been killed by his captors. While Canadian officials are working closely with authorities in the Philippines to formally confirm Mr.  Hall’s death, we have compelling reason to believe that reports to this effect are, unfortunately, true.    The vicious and brutal actions of the hostage-takers have led to a needless death. Canada holds the terrorist group who took him hostage fully responsible for this cold-blooded and senseless murder. With the tragic loss of two Canadians, I want to reiterate that terrorist hostage-takings only fuel more violence and instability.  Canada will not give into their fear mongering tactics and despicable attitude toward the suffering of others. This is precisely why the Government of Canada will not and cannot pay ransoms for hostages to terrorists groups, as doing so would endanger the lives of more Canadians. We are more committed than ever to working with the Government of the Philippines and international partners to pursue those responsible for these heinous acts and bring them to justice, however long it takes. The Government’s top priority, and my own as Prime Minister, is the safety and security of Canadian citizens. On behalf of the Government of Canada and all Canadians, I would like to express my heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of Mr.  Hall.  They have suffered a terrible loss, and this is a devastating moment for them.  Our thoughts are with them as they mourn this tragedy.  I would ask that the media respect their privacy, and allow them time to come to terms with their loss. Today marks yet another difficult day for Canada and for Canadians as we grieve as a nation for the loss of both John Ridsdel, who was killed on April 25, and Robert Hall. I was deeply saddened to learn today of the passing of Gilles Lamontagne at the age of 97. Mr.  Lamontagne lived a bold and full life.  His service to Canada started at a young age, when he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force during the Second World War and survived almost two years as a prisoner of war in Germany. After distinguishing himself as a military officer, Mr.  Lamontagne continued serving the public good.  In a career that spanned more than 30 years, he served as Mayor of Quebec City, Member of Parliament, Parliamentary Secretary, Minister of various federal departments, and Lieutenant-Governor of Quebec.  In all capacities, he served with exemplary dedication and compassion. For his efforts, Mr.  Lamontagne was named an Officer of the Order of Canada, a Knight of the Ordre national du Québec, a Knight of the French Legion of Honor, and received the Diamond Jubilee medal. On a personal level, I will remember Gilles mostly through the stories told by my father – of their time spent together in Montreal as teenagers and of his strong moral compass. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of this remarkable man.  We join Quebecers and all Canadians in mourning the passing of this great man. Today, let us promise to never forget the dignity and potential in the lives of all those fleeing persecution and conflict, and honour the commitment of those who help them. This year, World Refugee Day marks a somber milestone.  An estimated 60 million people are now refugees, asylum seekers, or internally displaced persons.  Over half of these people are children. In a time of economic uncertainty and tightening security, it is easy for countries to shy away from the plight of those seeking shelter from conflict and persecution.  We must do better than that, and lead with open minds and warm hearts, not closed borders and cold indifference. Canada was built by those who fled oppression and war, who left everything behind to start anew in a strange and faraway land.  We are a nation of millions of immigrants and refugees, of hundreds of cultures, languages, and religions, who are bound by one, unwavering, unshakable belief: we are stronger not in spite of our differences, but precisely because of them. We have a proud history of opening our arms – and our borders – to those in need: from Hungarian refugees in the 1950s to Ismaili Muslim refugees in the 1970s to Vietnamese boat people in the 1980s. Today, Canadians continue to open their homes and hearts to refugees fleeing Syria.  Since December, Canada has welcomed more than 25,000 Syrian refugees into communities across the country.  Another 15,000 privately-sponsored refugees will arrive in Canada by the end of the year because of the compassion and generosity of Canadians. As a country, we have had some deeply regrettable moments, like Komagata Maru, St.  Louis, and the Chinese Exclusion Act.  But the history of our nation is one in which we constantly challenge ourselves, and each other, to extend our personal definitions of who is a Canadian. As Canadians, let us recognize our responsibility to continue opening our doors and lending a welcoming hand to our most vulnerable neighbours around the world during their time of greatest need.  Let us give the refugees who arrive in Canada the opportunity to build a new, more hopeful life for themselves, like Canadians did before us, and Canadians did before them. Today, tomorrow, and all the days to come, let us show the world that Canada truly is the compassionate, generous country that we know it to be. Today, on National Aboriginal Day, let us take the time to celebrate and honour the unique heritage and outstanding achievements of the Indigenous peoples in Canada. National Aboriginal Day is first and foremost an occasion to celebrate the fundamental role First Nations, Métis, and Inuit have played – and continue to play – in shaping the identity of all Canadians.  Coast to coast to coast, their remarkable art and cultures, significant contributions and history, are essential to our sense of nationhood. Events over the past few months – including the loss of life to suicide and the feelings of despair felt in some communities – remind us that we must work in genuine partnership with Indigenous peoples, the provinces, and the territories to better support the well-being of children and families, improve the quality of education for Indigenous students, and ensure health services meet the needs of Indigenous communities. No relationship is more important to our government and to Canada than the one with Indigenous peoples.  Today, we reaffirm our government’s commitment to a renewed nation-to-nation relationship between Canada and Indigenous peoples, one based on the recognition of rights, respect, trust, co-operation, and partnership. We understand the importance of reconciliation and the process of truth-telling and healing in this renewal.  With this is mind, we will continue the vital work of reconciliation as outlined in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission Calls to Action, in partnership with First Nations, the Métis Nation, the Inuit, the provinces, and the territories.  This work will build on our commitment last month to fully adopt and implement the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Together, we will think seven generations out – as the Iroquois have taught – as we listen to Indigenous voices on environmental matters, build necessary roads, bridges, and water and wastewater infrastructure, and ensure a better and brighter future for Indigenous peoples in Canada. I invite you to join the #IndigenousReads campaign to help raise awareness and understanding through shared culture and stories and encourage steps toward reconciliation with Indigenous peoples. 31 years ago, our country suffered the worst mass murder in its history when 329 innocent people on board Air India Flight 182 were killed by a terrorist bomb.  Canadians were directly impacted by this senseless and brutal act of violence that left them grieving parents, children, relatives, friends, and colleagues. On this solemn day, Canadians across the country stand in solidarity with all those who have experienced first-hand the incredible pain of losing a loved one to terrorism. The recent cold-blooded murders of fourteen Canadian Embassy security guards in Kabul, the two Canadian hostages in the Philippines, as well as the terrorist attacks which resulted in six Canadian deaths in Burkina Faso and another in Indonesia, are a stark reminder that we are not immune to the threat of terrorism – which can strike anywhere, anytime. Terrorism is used to instill fear and designed to make us question not only our own safety, but also the democratic institutions that keep us safe.  This is exactly why Canada will continue to work closely with our allies – and the international community – to help fight extremism and terrorism, both at home and abroad.  We remain committed and vigilant in the Global Coalition’s fight against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).  We thank the brave women and men of our military, intelligence agencies, and local law enforcement that keep Canadians safe every day. We will continue to promote and defend human rights, justice and equality – values that are vital tools in the fight against intolerance, hatred, and fear.  No act of harm or destruction will ever be greater than our perseverance and resolve.  On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I extend our deepest condolences to those who have lost loved ones to terrorism.  We mourn with you and vow to never forget those who have been lost. The people of the UK have chosen to leave the EU. The UK and the EU are important strategic partners for Canada with whom we enjoy deep historical ties and common values.  We will continue to build relations with both parties as they forge a new relationship. Canada’s connections to our partners around the world are among its greatest assets, and these relationships contribute greatly to the prosperity of all Canadians. Canada has tremendous economic fundamentals that we are strengthening with key investments in infrastructure and measures to grow our middle class.  We are well positioned to weather global market uncertainty as we have done in the past. Prime Minister David Cameron indicated today that he will resign by the fall.  On behalf of all Canadians, I would like to thank him for being such a close ally and good friend to our country.  We wish him well. Today, on la Fête nationale du Québec, we celebrate the vibrant history of Québec and the unique culture and identity of its people.  As a Quebecer, I take enormous pride in my province’s creativity, strength, and character. June 24th also marks Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day, an occasion for all Francophones across the country to celebrate our proud traditions and history. On this day, we pay homage to the French language and our French-Canadian heritage.  Both have played a vital role in shaping our country, and defining who we are as Canadians. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all Quebecers and Canadians celebrating la Fête nationale du Québec and Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day. I join Canadians across the country today to celebrate multiculturalism, and our long and proud tradition of inclusion and diversity. As the first country in the world to adopt a policy of multiculturalism 45 years ago, Canada has shown time and time again that a country can be stronger not in spite of its differences, but because of them. As Canadians, we appreciate the immense freedom we have to show pride in our individual identities and ancestries.  No matter our religion, where we were born, what colour our skin, or what language we speak, we are equal members of this great country. Our roots reach out to every corner of the globe.  We are from far and wide, and speak over 200 languages.  Our national fabric is vibrant and varied, woven together by many cultures and heritages, and underlined by a core value of respect.  Multiculturalism is our strength, as synonymous with Canada as the Maple Leaf. Today, let us celebrate multiculturalism as a vital component of our national fabric, and let us express gratitude to Canadians of all backgrounds who have made, and who continue to make, such valuable contributions to our country.           Beaumont Hamel is a name that is seared into the hearts of all Newfoundlanders and Labradorians.  It is a name that represents courage, sacrifice, and sorrow. One hundred years ago to this very day – in what would become the bloodiest battle of the First World War – 810 young men from the Newfoundland Regiment were ordered out of their trench.  They calmly advanced, under withering machine gun and artillery fire, across no man’s land and into the teeth of the enemy. As one major wrote: ‘The only visible sign the men knew they were under such terrifying shell fire was that they tucked their chins into an advanced shoulder as they had so often done when fighting their way home against a Newfoundland blizzard. ’Of the 810 men who went ‘over the top’, only 68 would stand for roll call the following morning.  It was a loss that has echoed down through the generations, and it is this loss – this sacrifice – that we remember today.  It is their sacrifice that has allowed us to build this strong, free, and diverse country that we hold so dear. On this day, as our fellow Canadians gather to celebrate the maple leaf and everything it stands for, let us also remember the caribou, the brave men of the Newfoundland Regiment, and the ideals for which they fought. While we can never repay this debt, we can honour and remember all those who have served and continue to serve and protect our great nation. Before July 1, 1867, there was a Canada West and a Canada East.  There was an Upper Canada and a Lower Canada.  There was always a division.  Today, we celebrate the day, exactly 149 years ago, when the people of this great land came together, and forged one nation, one country – Canada. From the outset, Canada was formed not in spite of differences, but because of them.  Thanks to the hard work and understanding between many cultural and religious communities, Canada is the diverse, inclusive, and compassionate country that we are fortunate to call home today. This Canada Day, let us celebrate our shared Canadian identity and take pride in everything we have achieved together since Confederation.  We stand as a testament to the fact that a prosperous and hopeful nation can be as united as it is diverse. Coast to coast to coast, Canadians share many values – values like kindness, generosity, and respect.  Whether we are fundraising for Fort Mac, or welcoming Syrian refugees into our communities, we support each other in our times of need.  We stand together. Today, let us resolve to make our country better for our children and grandchildren, and remember that Canada will only be at its best when we all succeed. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish you and your loved ones a very happy Canada Day. Today, Muslims in Canada and around the world will gather to celebrate the end of the holy month of Ramadan and to give thanks for the spiritual renewal and many blessings received throughout the holy month. Eid al-Fitr is a time to strengthen family ties, renew friendships, and show compassion and humanity towards those in need both in local communities and around the world. To mark this important occasion, Muslims attend special morning prayers, exchange greetings and gifts, and share a special celebratory meal - their first daytime meal in a month.  On this day, let us thank Canada’s vibrant Muslim community for its tremendous contributions to the shaping and building of our great nation.  Our cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths, and a source of pride. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating Eid al-Fitr in Canada and around the world. Eid Mubarak! Today, we pause in solemn remembrance of those whose lives were lost, and in support of those whose lives were irreparably changed by the tragic events that took place in Lac-Mégantic on July 6, 2013. In the face of unimaginable pain and loss, the people of Lac-Mégantic have shown incredible resilience and courage.  A few months ago, when the community of Fort McMurray was devastated by wildfires, the community of Lac-Mégantic reached out with an immediate outpouring of support.  Canadians continue to be deeply moved by the strength and selflessness of the people of Lac-Mégantic, who lent a hand to distant neighbours, even while their own efforts to rebuild continue. Rail safety remains a top priority for the Government of Canada, and we will continue to take steps to improve the safety of the Canadian rail system.  The Minister of Transport, Marc Garneau, visited Lac-Mégantic in April to hear from those most directly affected by the tragedy. To the people of Lac-Mégantic, please know that you have our steadfast support as you continue to recover and heal.  We remember you and all that you lost, and will use this memory to strengthen our resolve to make our railroads the safest in the world, and ensure the tragic events of Lac-Mégantic never happen again.  Today, we join Shia Ismaili Muslims in Canada and around the world to celebrate His Highness Prince Karim Aga Khan IV, who on this day in 1957 became Imam—spiritual leader—of the Shia Imami Ismaili Muslims. In the almost 60 years since, the Aga Khan has demonstrated a tireless and admirable dedication to the common good.  His achievements and contributions toward improving the lives of some of the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people are immeasurable. Above all, he has demonstrated the importance of being a good global citizen and the value of helping others, regardless of their origin or religion, to reach their full potential. The values promoted by the Aga Khan—pluralism, compassion, inclusion, respect for diversity, and human rights—are those that we as Canadians hold dear, and we are honoured to call him a friend, and to host here in Canada both the Global Centre for Pluralism and the only Islamic Museum in North America—the Aga Khan Museum in Toronto. On this day, we thank the Aga Khan for being a true humanitarian, and for inspiring us all to show more kindness and generosity of heart to others. Kushiali Mubarak. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to extend my warm congratulations to the United Kingdom’s new Prime Minister, Theresa May. Prime Minister May has dedicated her life – and her career – to public service.  She has sat as a Member of Parliament since 1997, and, more recently, has become one of the longest serving Home Secretaries in the United Kingdom’s history. Canada and the United Kingdom are not only important strategic partners and allies, we share a deep friendship – a rich and diverse relationship built and maintained through our strong people-to-people ties and our shared history.  We look forward to working closely with Prime Minister May as we continue to address issues of mutual interest that will ensure ongoing stability and prosperity for all of our people. I would also like to thank David Cameron for his service and dedication to the people of the United Kingdom, especially during times of economic uncertainty.  I wish him the best of luck in all his future endeavours. I was heartbroken to learn of the many dozens of innocent victims who were killed or injured as a result of today’s terrorist attack that targeted Bastille Day celebrations in Nice, France. On behalf of all Canadians, I extend my deepest condolences to the families and friends of those who were killed.  We also wish a speedy recovery to the many more that were injured. Canada and France are the closest of friends, and we stand by the French people as they face this terrible ordeal.  We have offered all possible assistance to the French Government. Senseless acts like this one are not isolated events, and we will continue to work with our Allies and partners to fight terrorism in all of its forms.  We will bring those who are responsible to justice, whether they be the perpetrators, or those involved in funding or organizing such attacks. Our thoughts and prayers are with the people of France at this very difficult time.  We mourn the loss of so many innocent victims. ***IMPORTANT***We are still in the process of determining whether any Canadians have been impacted by this event with local authorities. Canadian citizens in France requiring emergency consular assistance should contact the Embassy of Canada (https://travel. gc. ca/assistance/embassies-consulates/france)  or call Global Affairs Canada's 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre collect at +1 613 996-8885.  An email can also be sent to sos@international. gc. ca. Friends and relatives in Canada of Canadian citizens known to be in the area can contact Global Affairs Canada's 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre by calling 613-996-8885 or 1-800-387-3124, or by sending an email to sos@international. gc. ca. On behalf of all Canadians, I would like to express our concern about this evening's events in Turkey.  We call for restraint by all parties.  Canada supports the preservation of Turkish democracy, and condemns any attempt to subvert Turkey's democratic institutions by force of arms. The Government of Canada is being kept informed of developments in Turkey, and we are doing everything possible to ensure that the safety and security of Canadians in that country is maintained. On this 33rd anniversary, we join Canadians of Tamil descent and members of the Tamil community around the world in commemoration of the events of Black July in 1983. Let us pause to remember the victims of the anti-Tamil pogroms and all the lives that were lost throughout the entirety of the Sri Lankan Civil War.  We offer our deepest condolences to those who lost family and friends. The war and the devastation it wrought reminds us to heal the wounds of those who have suffered, and to promote unity over division and inclusion over prejudice. Canada will continue to encourage the Sri Lankan government to fulfill its commitment to the United Nations Human Rights Council to bring about real peace, reconciliation, accountability and justice for the people in Sri Lanka. On June 25, 1950, Communist armies from the North charged across the 38th Parallel and invaded South Korea.  Over the next several years, more than 26,000 Canadians – many veterans of the Second World War, and some still teenagers – left behind their loved ones to defend a country half a world away. The Korean War would become one of the dirtiest, bloodiest, and deadliest conflicts in Canadian history.  The brutal combat was reminiscent of the First World War: soldiers dug out trenches by hand, and lived between four walls of dirt for weeks – sometimes months – on end.  The harshest battle was often not against enemy forces, but unforgiving weather: frigid winds and bitter cold that turned food into ice, and relentless rains that dissolved land into mud and muck.  Sixty-three years ago today, the combat phase of the Korean War ended in armistice.  The cost of the war was heavy, with two and half million victims.  516 Canadians made the ultimate sacrifice.  Many more came home bearing the scars of war.  Approximately 7,000 Canadians continued to serve in the tense theatre of operations between the signing of the Armistice and the end of 1955. We are proud of the role Canada played, along with our United Nations allies, to defend the sovereignty of South Korea.  Because of our Korean War Veterans, fifty million South Koreans now live in a peaceful and prosperous nation.  Their courage and sacrifice helped to change the course of history. Today, I urge all Canadians to learn more about Canada’s role in resolving the combat phase of the Korean War.  I also call on all citizens to join me in expressing our heartfelt gratitude to all those from our military, and their families who support them, who have fought, and continue to fight, so courageously to defend the principles of peace, freedom, and democracy around the world. We are delighted by the Governor General’s announcement that Their Royal Highnesses, The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, will visit Canada this fall.  During their stay, the Duke and Duchess will travel to British Columbia and Yukon on a visit that will showcase some of Canada’s finest natural beauty. This Royal Tour, the second undertaken by Their Royal Highnesses to Canada, also presents a unique opportunity for Canadians of all backgrounds to meet with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and learn more about our heritage, traditions, and institutions. Our government looks forward to providing Canadians with further details closer to the beginning of the Royal Tour. With the parade of athletes into Maracanã Stadium in Rio, the world will come together to celebrate excellence, friendship, and respect in sport with the official opening of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. I am sure that we will continue to be inspired throughout the entire 19 days of the competition by spectacular moments of strength, speed, skill, and perseverance as athletes from around the world compete for a spot on the Olympic podium.  These athletes, along with their coaches, families, and friends, have sacrificed so much to reach this level, and to embody the Olympic motto – Citius – Altius – Fortius (Faster, Higher, Stronger). On behalf of all Canadians, I extend my heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to our athletes who have displayed such tremendous dedication and commitment.  They motivate us—especially our young people—to be more active in sport, whether it is in our own backyards, in local parks, or in sport venues from coast to coast to coast.  We are very proud of each and every one of them, and confident that they will be excellent ambassadors of Canada’s culture, athleticism, and values. We, Team Canada—35 million people strong—will be watching and cheering on 314 Canadian athletes at the Rio 2016 Olympic Games.  Good luck and make us proud!Canada has a long and proud history of peacekeeping.  For decades, brave Canadian women and men have put themselves in harm’s way to protect the world’s most vulnerable civilians – including women, children, and marginalized groups. On National Peacekeepers’ Day, we celebrate all those – past and present – who have worked selflessly to advance the cause of peace, democracy, human rights, and the rule of law around the world. Since the days of Lester B.  Pearson, the members of our military and police forces – as well as many Canadian civilians – have made concrete contributions to the pursuit of hope and security in international conflict zones.  These individuals stand for the very best of what it means to be Canadian. Moving forward, we will increase Canada’s support to United Nations peace operations: providing more personnel and training to UN peace support missions; increasing our conflict prevention, mediation, and peacebuilding efforts; advancing the roles of women and youth in the promotion of peace and security; and supporting UN reform efforts to make peace support initiatives more effective. Finally, on this day, let us pay tribute to the many Canadians who made the ultimate sacrifice during peacekeeping operations in distant lands so that both local populations and Canadians alike could enjoy a more peaceful world.  We will remember and honour their selfless contributions to humanity. International Youth Day is an opportunity for people around the world to reflect on contributions by youth – both past and present – to making the world a better place. The theme of this year’s International Youth Day is eradicating poverty and achieving sustainable production and consumption.  These global challenges demand fresh thinking and renewed vision.  No one is ever too young to be a leader, and seek the answers that could combat climate change, build fairer, more inclusive societies, and change the world. Canadian youth have innovative ideas and new perspectives on how we should address the opportunities and challenges of our day.  That is why we established the Prime Minister’s Youth Council to ensure we hear, at the highest level of government, what young people have to say.  Youth issues are everyone’s issues, and youth should have a voice in decisions that will affect them for the rest of their lives. On this day, and every day, I encourage young people to initiate and lead the change we seek and need now.  Be the leaders of today.  There is no reason to wait until tomorrow. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those marking the occasion a happy and inspiring International Youth Day. Today, we join the Pakistani community – here in Canada, in Pakistan, and around the world – in celebrating Pakistan’s 70th Independence Day. I look forward to working with Prime Minister Sharif to further strengthen the relationship between our two countries, and to working together on global issues including, peace, security, and development cooperation. On this day, I invite all Canadians to recognize the tremendous contributions that the Pakistani-Canadian community has made – and continues to make – to our great country.  We know that Canada is a stronger and more resilient nation because of its diversity. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating today a happy and festive Independence Day. Today, we join the people of India and members of the Indo-Canadian community in celebrating India's 70th Independence Day. Canada and India unite in our shared traditions of democracy and diversity.  Together, our nations stand as a testament to the fact that countries can prosper not in spite of their diversity, but precisely because of it. It has been a pleasure to meet with Prime Minister Modi, and I look forward to working together to further strengthen the relationship between our two countries, and to collaborating on global issues, including peace and security, climate change, and gender equality. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the significant contributions that Indo-Canadians have made to our national fabric, and wish all those celebrating today a happy Independence Day. Today, we celebrate the unique history and rich culture of the Acadian people, and recognize the important contributions they have made to our society and our history. Acadian roots run centuries deep and stretch long past Confederation.  In the early 1600s, Acadians established the first French settlements in what would eventually become Canada.  Since then, Acadians have played a significant role in shaping the country we all call home. Despite many hardships, Acadians have showed strength in maintaining their distinct identity over the centuries.  Their determination and resilience have been visible throughout history, and have preserved a vibrant culture, a rich set of customs, and a beautiful language that continue to enrich our country today. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to learn more about the Acadia of past and present, and wish all those celebrating today a happy and memorable National Acadian Day. Today, we join the people of the Republic of Korea and members of the Korean-Canadian community in celebrating the 71st anniversary of Korea's independence, also known as ‘Gwangbokjeol,’ or ‘Restoration of Light Day. ’Over sixty years ago, thousands of Canadians fought in the Korean War in the defence of the Republic of Korea.  Since then, our two countries have enjoyed a close and friendly relationship, based on our shared history, common values, and robust economic ties. I look forward to working with President Park to further build upon our commercial relations and warm friendship. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the significant contributions Canadians of Korean descent have made to our national fabric, and wish all those celebrating today a happy Independence Day. Today, we join the people of the Republic of Korea and members of the Korean-Canadian community in celebrating the 71st anniversary of Korea's independence, also known as ‘Gwangbokjeol,’ or ‘Restoration of Light Day. ’Over sixty years ago, thousands of Canadians fought in the Korean War in the defence of the Republic of Korea.  Since then, our two countries have enjoyed a close and friendly relationship, based on our shared history, common values, and robust economic ties. I look forward to working with President Park to further build upon our commercial relations and warm friendship. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the significant contributions Canadians of Korean descent have made to our national fabric, and wish all those celebrating today a happy Independence Day. On this day – 74 years ago – thousands of Canadian soldiers, alongside Allied forces, launched a raid on the German-occupied port of Dieppe. Canadian and Allied infantry faced heavy resistance as soon as they landed.  They fought through barbed wire, mortar barrages, and machine gun fire.  Many never made it beyond the beach where they landed. In the air, Royal Air Force and Royal Canadian Air Force fighters and bombers waged one of the most intense air battles in the whole war. After nine hours of fighting, Canadian and Allied forces withdrew. The operation came at a steep price for Canada.  More than 3,300 Canadians were killed, wounded, or taken prisoner. These sacrifices were not made in vain.  The raid on Dieppe led to a better understanding of enemy defences and laid the groundwork for future Allied amphibious assaults – including D-Day. On this solemn day, we honour the courage and sacrifice of the thousands of Canadians who fought alongside Allied forces in Dieppe. Let us remember those who gave so much so that we could enjoy the peace and freedoms that we do today. As the 2016 Rio Summer Olympics draw to a close, I would like to thank all athletes from around the world for making these such exciting games. On behalf of the whole country, I congratulate Canadian athletes on your remarkable achievements.  We know your success would not have been possible without the tremendous support of your coaches, support teams, families, friends, and communities.  We are very proud of all of you. During the past 19 days, Canadian Olympians – both veterans and newcomers – produced many memorable Olympic moments. Canadians, especially our young women and girls, were incredibly inspired by our female Olympians who were a force to be reckoned with throughout the Games.  I know the impact of our athletes’ accomplishments will live on and be replayed in playgrounds and on sport fields for many, many years to come. On behalf of all Canadians, I extend my thanks and congratulations to Brazil for hosting a wonderful Olympic Games.  We eagerly look forward to the Rio 2016 Paralympic Games, starting on September 7, 2016, where incredible athleticism from around the world will once more be on display. Today, we honour the victims and survivors of Communism and Nazism in Europe, and all those around the world who continue to endure and fight against the oppression of totalitarian regimes.  Black Ribbon Day marks the anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.  This pact, signed in 1939 between the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, allowed for the illegal political and territorial rearrangement of Eastern and Central Europe. In the years that followed, millions of people were robbed of their homes and suffered untold atrocities at the hands of the Soviet and Nazi regimes. Many of those who came to Canada to escape these regimes still bear the scars of the unspeakable acts committed against them and their loved ones.  These Canadians and their descendants have made remarkable contributions to our country, and continue to strengthen our national fabric.  We must never forget their stories. Today, we express solidarity with all victims of totalitarian regimes and reiterate Canada’s unwavering commitment to the principles of justice, democracy, and universal human rights.  We remember this dark period of history to ensure that the world never again lets such tyranny go unopposed. Today, we join the Ukrainian community—here in Canada and around the world—to celebrate the 25thanniversary of Ukraine’s independence. Canada is proud to have been the first western country to recognize Ukraine’s declaration of independence in 1991.  The vibrant Ukrainian-Canadian community—nearly 1. 3 million people strong—has contributed immeasurably to building Canada, and has helped forge a strong, enduring relationship between both of our countries. During my recent official visit to the country, I was reminded of our deep historical ties and our shared desire for a prosperous future for Ukrainians and Canadians.  I was moved by the sacrifices that Ukrainians have made, and continue to make, for their freedom, democracy, and independence. As we mark this momentous occasion, we reiterate our strong support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.  Canada fully supports Ukraine as it takes important steps to bring greater security, prosperity, and economic independence to its people. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating a happy Ukrainian Independence Day. Slava Ukraini!On this day – 25 years ago – Canada re-established diplomatic ties with Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, after the three Baltic states declared independence from the Soviet Union. Since then, our countries have enjoyed a dynamic and friendly relationship, rooted in the shared values of democracy and freedom, and our partnership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Canada never recognized the Soviet Union’s occupation of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, and always supported their struggle to restore independence during decades of Soviet occupation. Canada looks forward to further strengthening its relations with Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, and working with them on bilateral and regional issues, including support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.  This includes Canada’s recent commitment to lead a robust multinational NATO battlegroup in Latvia, as part of NATO’s enhanced Forward Presence in Eastern Europe.  We will continue working closely with our NATO Allies ? including those in the Baltics ? to ensure our citizens can continue to live in safety and security.  On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the tremendous contributions of Canadians of Estonian, Latvian, and Lithuanian descent to our national fabric, and offer our best wishes to everyone celebrating today. Today, we commemorate Labour Day – an occasion to celebrate the many accomplishments of Canada’s labour movement. For more than a century, the labour movement has played an integral role in improving the lives of Canadian workers, and protecting Canada’s middle class and those working hard to join it.  In the face of great adversity, the labour movement has fought to ensure fair living wages, safe working conditions, an inclusive workplace, and equitable relations with employers.   The Government of Canada is committed to collaborating with the labour movement to ensure that working people are protected and supported during their entire careers and retirement.  That is why we worked hard with the provinces and territories and achieved an agreement in principle to expand the Canada Pension Plan, invested more than $85 million in union-based apprenticeship training, and temporarily increased Employment Insurance benefits for workers hit hardest by the commodities downturn.  We have also committed to repair and build roads and bridges, and other infrastructure across Canada, which will create better, well-paying jobs for union members and more livable communities for Canadian families. We are working to restore fair and balanced labour laws that acknowledge the important role of unions in promoting and protecting Canada’s middle class and those working hard to join it, and improve workers’ access to good quality skills training. Moving forward, we will amend the Canada Labour Code to allow federally regulated workers the right to formally request flexible work arrangements from their employers. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all Canadians a safe and happy Labour Day. Tonight, we join more than 160 countries from around the world to celebrate the opening of the Rio 2016 Paralympic Summer Games. Over the course of the next 11 days, Canadians from coast to coast to coast will watch and cheer the 162 world-class athletes representing our country in 19 different sports.  We are confident that these athletes will show the world what it means to be Canadian as they proudly wear the Maple Leaf and push for the podium. The drive and dedication that these athletes, coaches, and support staff have shown to make it to the highest level of sport competition is impressive – and now the entire world will have the privilege of watching them as they strive for their personal bests and embody in every way the international Paralympic motto of ‘Spirit in Motion’. I join all Canadians – the team behind the team, #35Mstrong – in wishing the very best to all of the athletes in Rio, and to thank them for inspiring all of us, especially our young people, to always strive for excellence.  Go Canada!Today, we mark the 15th anniversary of the terrorist attacks in the United States that killed nearly 3,000 innocent victims – including 24 Canadians. On this solemn day, we join with the families and friends of the victims to remember and honour those who fell.  We also offer our heartfelt support to those still struggling with the physical and emotional injuries they sustained on 9/11. We recognize the extraordinary courage and bravery of the first responders on that day and the days that followed.  We honour the EMTs, the firefighters, the police officers, and all those who ran toward the sounds of danger and the plumes of smoke, risking their lives so others might live. While 9/11 will long be remembered as a day of destruction and terror, let us also remember it for the remarkable humanity that was shown in such a tragic time.  May we never forget the countless Canadians, from coast to coast to coast, who opened their hearts and their homes to those affected by the attacks. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage Canadians to remember the tremendous outpouring of goodwill shown on 9/11 by participating in charitable and community activities, and other worthy causes across the country, as part of the National Day of Service. Today, Coptic Orthodox Christians in Canada and around the world will welcome the New Year and celebrate the Feast of Nayrouz. The Feast of Nayrouz—also known as the Feast of Rivers—began as a day of thanksgiving to welcome the rising waters of the Nile which provided farmers with essential irrigation for their crops.  On this day, Coptic Christians gather to pray, exchange gifts, and visit with family and friends. Most importantly, the New Year is a time to honour all those who sacrificed so much—including their lives—for their faith during years of intense persecution in Egypt while under Roman rule.  Their courage, steadfastness, and unwavering dedication to their faith in the face of oppression continue to serve as an example to Coptic Christians today. Today, we extend our heartfelt thanks for the many contributions Coptic Christian communities have made to Canada.  We wish all those celebrating a joyful Feast, and a peaceful and healthy start to the New Year. Happy Nayrouz!Today, Muslims in Canada and around the world will gather to celebrate Eid al-Adha, which marks the end of the Hajj. Eid al-Adha is an opportunity for prayer, forgiveness, and celebration.  Friends and family will gather to attend morning prayers, share a celebratory meal, exchange greetings and gifts, reflect on lessons of sacrifice, and show compassion to those in need. It is on days like today that we are reminded of the values that bring all Canadians together – those of peace, empathy, family, and friendship. Today also serves as an opportunity for us all to recognize the invaluable contributions of our thriving Muslim community that enrich our national fabric each and every day.  No matter our faith, culture, or country, we are reminded that our diversity is Canada’s greatest strength. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to Muslims in Canada and around the world who are celebrating Eid al-Adha, and congratulate those performing the Hajj this year. Eid Mubarak!Ten years ago, senseless acts of violence were committed at Dawson College in Montréal, when a shooter opened fire on innocent students, killing one young woman and injuring 16 other people.  In the aftermath of these tragic events, a whole community was left grieving and in a state of shock. On this sad anniversary, we remember and honour the memory of the victims of this tragedy.  Our thoughts are with the victims, their loved ones, and all those whose lives were forever changed that day. The Government of Canada’s top priority is to protect Canadians.  We condemn all forms of violence and consider all attacks designed to spread fear and kill innocent people to be unacceptable. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I join Canadians from across the country in paying tribute to the victims of this tragedy. Today, Canadians of Chinese, Korean, Japanese, and Vietnamese heritage will celebrate the Mid-Autumn Festival, also known as the Moon Festival. The festival is a time to celebrate the harvest, and give thanks for the year’s successes. To mark this joyous occasion, families and loved ones get together, light colorful lanterns, share traditional mooncakes, exchange greetings and gifts, and admire the spectacular beauty of the full moon. This celebration serves as a reminder of the rich and vibrant diversity that is at the core of our country’s identity. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I offer our best wishes to everyone celebrating today. We are delighted that Kevin Garratt has returned safely to Canada and is with his family once more. We remain deeply impressed by the grace and resilience of the Garratt family, especially Kevin and Julia. The Government of Canada has been seized of this case at the highest levels.  We want to thank consular officials who work behind the scenes every day in support of Canadians abroad. We ask all to respect the family’s wish for privacy at this time. As the Paralympic Games draw to a close, I invite all Canadians to reflect on the incredible performances of our athletes over the last eleven days. We watched from coast to coast to coast with excitement as they competed against the best in the world.  Our Paralympians have reminded us of what can be accomplished with hard work, relentless passion, and the tremendous support of coaches, families, friends, and communities. These athletes showed Canada and the world their determination, spirit, and sportsmanship.  They have inspired all Canadians, including young people living with disabilities. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I extend my thanks to all Paralympians and to the people of Brazil on making these such memorable Games.  I also encourage all Canadians to provide our returning athletes with the warmest of welcomes home and to celebrate what they have accomplished during the Rio 2016 Paralympic Games. Canada and the Republic of Armenia enjoy a dynamic and friendly relationship, rooted in the shared values of democracy and freedom, bilateral relations, and our collaboration in international organizations such as La Francophonie. I look forward to working with President Serzh Sargsyan and newly-appointed Prime Minister Karen Karapetyan to further strengthen the relations between our two countries, and to work together on global and regional issues including peace, security, and development cooperation. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the important contributions of Canadians of Armenian descent to our national fabric, and offer our best wishes to everyone celebrating today. Canadians are relieved that Dr.  Hoodfar has been released from jail and will soon be reunited with her family, friends and colleagues. The Government of Canada has been actively and constructively engaged at the highest levels in Dr.  Hoodfar’s case – since her ordeal began – working for her release and return to Canada. Our officials have also been providing consular assistance to her family and will continue to do so until their loved one has arrived home safely. In the absence of diplomatic representation of its own in Iran, Canada worked closely with others who were instrumental in helping secure Dr.  Hoodfar’s release – most notably Oman, Italy and Switzerland.  I would like to extend our sincerest appreciation for their support. I would also like to recognize the cooperation of those Iranian authorities who facilitated her release and repatriation.  They understand that cases like these impede more productive relations. We ask all to respect the family’s wish for privacy at this time. It is with great sadness that I learned tonight of the death of former Israeli President and Prime Minister Shimon Peres. Shimon Peres was, above all, a man of peace and a man dedicated to the well-being of the Jewish people. Over the course of his long and distinguished life, Mr.  Peres made enormous contributions to the founding and building of the State of Israel.  He was devoted to promoting understanding between his country and its neighbours, and shared a Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to create peace in the Middle East. Mr.  Peres was an internationally-respected statesman and a great friend to Canada.  He visited our country often, and helped build relations that remain strong to this day. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of Mr.  Peres – and to the people of Israel.  His legacy as a tireless advocate for peace will not be forgotten. Today, we join the Hindu community in Canada – and around the world – to celebrate the beginning of Navratri. Navratri is a celebration of the triumph of good over evil.  This year, it takes place at the beginning of October, around harvest time. To mark this occasion, families and loved ones gather over nine nights to worship, dance, and celebrate, culminating in the tenth night of festivities.  This festival is celebrated by Hindus and non-Hindus alike across Canada, India, and around the world. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the important contributions of Canada’s Hindu community to our national fabric, and extend our warmest regards to everyone celebrating Navratri. This October, I am pleased to join Canadians from coast to coast to coast to celebrate Women’s History Month. This year’s theme – Because of Her – gives all Canadians the chance to recognize and appreciate the significant achievements and contributions women have made to our great country. Despite historical hurdles and barriers, women have taken their place – as politicians and advocates, as entrepreneurs and leaders, as artists and academics – pushing for advances and changes that have benefited us all. The Government of Canada has chosen to make gender equality a priority.  We formed Canada’s first gender-balanced cabinet, and appointed the first woman Government House leader as well as the first ever Minister fully dedicated to gender issues.  Our government has embraced the opportunity to serve on the UN Commission on the Status of Women, and we are ardent supporters of the UN Women’s HeforShe campaign.  I am honoured to be the youth ambassador for HeforShe.  In this role I will advocate for both gender equality and the full support and involvement of youth around the world – youth who can help us achieve gender equality faster and more effectively. Our government will also continue to support the implementation of gender-based analysis across government departments to ensure gender implications are considered in all government policies, programs, and legislation. While we celebrate the progress made, we remain keenly aware of the important work that still needs to be done to achieve true gender equality.  By highlighting stories of how women have shaped our lives, we can inspire both current and future generations to continue to fight for a society in which all people feel empowered, and have the same opportunities to reach their full potential. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to join us in celebrating Women’s History Month.  I also urge you to become part of the Government of Canada’s #BecauseofHer campaign, to share and learn more about all of the remarkable women – past and present – who have influenced us, and who have helped build a better, stronger, and much more inclusive Canada. Today, we join Jewish communities – in Canada, in Israel, and around the world – in celebrating Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year. Rosh Hashanah, which occurs on the first and second days of the Jewish month of Tishrei, marks the beginning of the Days of Awe.  It is a time to reflect on the past year, and look forward with hope and renewed purpose to the year ahead. To mark this occasion, families and friends gather to pray and hear the blowing of the Shofar – a ram's horn trumpet – exchange greetings, and share a special meal. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the important contributions of the Jewish community in Canada to our national fabric, and wish all those celebrating a new year filled with hope, peace, and renewal. Shana Tova Umetukah!World Teachers’ Day is a special day to honour the teachers who have played an essential role in our lives. The theme of this year’s World Teachers’ Day – Valuing teachers, improving their status – is an important one.  Teachers have the awesome responsibility and the humbling opportunity of building the society of tomorrow through the students they teach every day in their classrooms. Enriching and educating the next generation of Canadians is no small task.  It requires a lot of generosity, compassion, and hard work.  Day in and day out, teachers seek new ways of engaging with students and explaining tough concepts, taking the time to understand students’ needs while empowering them to satisfy their own curiosity. The Government of Canada is committed to providing teachers with the tools necessary to help students succeed.  That is why we are undertaking a broad range of initiatives in this area, including: helping teachers and early childhood educators recover some out-of-pocket expenses for classroom supplies through a new school supply tax credit; investing in schools on First Nations reserves and in infrastructure projects at Canadian universities and colleges; providing learning opportunities for displaced children in the Middle East; and promoting cooperation in education with countries such as Mexico through Canada’s International Education Strategy. I am exceptionally proud of having been a teacher.  Regardless of whatever other job titles I hold over the course of my life, I will first and foremost be a teacher.  That is why I was particularly delighted to present this year’s Prime Minister's Awards for Teaching Excellence and Excellence in Early Childhood Education. In fact, today is also the beginning of the nomination period for the Prime Minister’s Awards.  Between now and January 9, 2017, I encourage all Canadians to recognize our tremendous educators and their contributions to the future of Canada by nominating them for the #PMAwards. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I thank teachers in Canada and around the globe.  You are inspirational leaders who change lives, and build a better world, every day. World Mental Health Day is a time to reflect on the importance of mental health and wellness, and to foster open discussion in our families, places of work, and communities. This year’s theme, Psychological First Aid, brings attention to the impact a helping hand can have in the life of someone experiencing a traumatic event or difficult change.  Thousands of Canadians provide much needed social and psychological first aid to those who need it most: from the paramedic speaking with someone who has just witnessed a violent accident; to the immigrant services worker helping a refugee claimant integrate successfully into a new community; to a family member, friend, or colleague supporting someone close to them. In recognition of the importance of mental health and wellness, the Government of Canada is taking action to help Canadians create resilient communities that are supportive of mental well-being.  This includes working with provincial and territorial governments, Indigenous Peoples, community partners, and other stakeholders to address the stigma attached to mental health issues, and to improve access to quality mental health services. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to thank all those Canadians providing assistance and care to those facing mental health issues.  I would also like to thank all those – including my mother Margaret – who have contributed to the public discussion on mental wellness through the openness and courage they have shown in sharing their personal struggles. Today, Canadians will gather with family and loved ones to share a meal and give thanks for the countless blessings we enjoy. Thanksgiving offers the opportunity to express gratitude for all that enriches our lives.  It is also a time to reach out to those less fortunate – here in Canada and around the world – and lend a helping hand. Over the past year, Canadians have welcomed more than 30,000 Syrian refugees who fled their homes to seek a safer and better future.  As these and other newcomers celebrate their first Thanksgiving in Canada, let us never forget that helping those in need is at the heart of what makes us Canadian. Today, we also give thanks for our men and women in uniform.  For some, their service and sacrifice means spending the holiday away from home. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish everyone a very happy Thanksgiving filled with good food and great company. The International Day of the Girl is an opportunity to celebrate the empowerment of girls and young women, at home and around the world, in every sphere locally and globally.  It is also a day to draw attention to the unique challenges that girls still face. While the international community has made important progress in improving the lives of girls and young women, there is still significant work to be done.  Far too many girls and young women are still denied basic human rights, including education, health care and personal security.  Far too many succumb to preventable diseases or are held back from pursuing their dreams. The Government of Canada believes that every girl deserves an equal start in life, the chance to grow to her full potential, and every opportunity available to boys.  I take this commitment to Canadians, to girls around the world, and to my own daughter very seriously.  That is why we are investing in several programs – in Canada and beyond – that will directly benefit girls and young women, including those that promote gender equality, education and health care, and support efforts to prevent gender-based violence and stop human trafficking. On this day, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to join us in supporting girls and young women to realize their dreams and achieve their full potential.  I also urge you to take part in the Government of Canada’s #BecauseOfHer campaign to honour the amazing girls and women who are making a difference in your community.  To all Canadians, and especially to girls and young women: Happy International Day of the Girl. At sunset today, Jewish communities – in Canada, in Israel, and around the world – will observe the beginning of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement.  Yom Kippur is one of the holiest days in the Jewish calendar.  It marks the end of the 10 Days of Awe, and is a time for repentance and renewal. On this occasion, families and loved ones gather to fast and pray, reflect on the past year, and seek peace and reconciliation for the year to come. Yom Kippur is an opportunity for us all to reflect on the tremendous contributions that the Jewish Canadian community has made – and continues to make – to the shaping and building of our great country.  We know that Canada is a stronger and more resilient country because of its diversity. On behalf of our entire family, Sophie and I wish an easy fast to all those observing Yom Kippur. G’mar Chatimah Tova. Today, over 500,000 students in more than 60 countries, including thousands across Canada, are marking the 10th annual Global Dignity Day. The Global Dignity organization aims to inspire respect, self-esteem, and openness to diversity in young people, as well as promote the idea that every human being has the universal right to lead a dignified life. I encourage all young Canadians to step up, show up, and speak up.  Youth have the ability to think decades ahead and are not afraid to challenge the status quo today.  As our government looks 40 years down the road – not just four – young Canadians will be instrumental in achieving this vision. Today, and every day, we celebrate the fact that everyone – no matter their age – has value, worth, and the potential to help build a better world. I am extremely proud to be one of Global Dignity’s National Role Models and encourage Canadians to promote a life of dignity for all. Congratulations to everyone involved in marking Global Dignity Day in Canada. On behalf of all Canadians, I am delighted to extend my congratulations to Ant?nio Guterres on his appointment by the United Nations General Assembly to be the next United Nations Secretary General, beginning in January 2017. Canada firmly believes that the United Nations is essential to resolving many of the world’s most pressing challenges – from climate change, to refugees and migration, to securing peace. Early next year, Mr.  Guterres takes on one of the most challenging jobs in the world.  Canada will be there to help him and the UN make the world a better place for its 7. 5 billion inhabitants. We have worked closely with Mr.  Guterres during his time as UN High Commissioner for Refugees, and we look forward to working with him in his new capacity as Secretary General. I was deeply saddened to learn that former Alberta Premier Jim Prentice was killed in a plane crash last night in British Columbia. Jim Prentice brought his deep convictions to everything he turned his hand to, whether it was law, business, or politics.  At each step of his career, he worked tirelessly for the people of Canada and Alberta – both as a federal minister in several different portfolios, and later, as Premier of the province. He was broadly respected in the House of Commons – across all party lines – for his intelligence, commitment, and honest straightforward approach on tough issues.  I greatly enjoyed the time I spent working closely beside Jim in the House, and know that he will be missed by his colleagues on both sides of the aisle. Today, we mourn the passing of a great Canadian.  His legacy will live on in the work he did for Albertans and for all Canadians – particularly in the important role he played in finalizing the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement – and through his daughters, who he loved dearly and was incredibly proud of.   On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to his family and friends and to the loved ones of all those who perished in this tragic accident. Small business owners work incredibly hard to provide Canadians with quality goods and services while also creating job opportunities that strengthen communities across the country and grow the middle class. In Canada there are over 1. 16 million small and medium sized businesses.  These businesses account for 99 per cent of all firms, and employ over 90 per cent of the labour force in the private sector.  They are anything but ‘small’ in terms of their contribution to Canada’s economic growth, job creation, and innovation. Small Business Week is important for many reasons.  It allows Canadians to thank small business owners and entrepreneurs for their enormous contributions to our country’s prosperity.  It is also a chance for current and future small business owners to participate in events across the country to learn, network, and share ideas about making their businesses as innovative, export-ready, and successful as possible. Our government recognizes the importance of small businesses and the entrepreneurs that make them thrive.  That is why we are investing in several programs that support innovation and skills training, including for women, Indigenous, and young entrepreneurs. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to celebrate our small business owners and entrepreneurs.  We hope you will be able to take part in the events organized across Canada, learn, share ideas and do some networking, while recognizing the hard work, talent, ambition, and determination of small business owners and entrepreneurs. Canada is taking a stand at the United Nations General Assembly today to protect vulnerable Syrians and help find a solution to the conflict engulfing that country. With the support of 70 other UN countries, Canada is applying as much diplomatic pressure as possible on the UN Security Council to break their impasse on Syria. On behalf of the government, Minister Dion called today for an immediate cessation of hostilities, the provision of unhindered humanitarian access to the victims of the conflict – including children and women – and the resumption of political talks. I am very proud that our mission at the United Nations, spearheaded by Ambassador Marc-André Blanchard, is leading the charge to protect the many victims of this tragic conflict. I encourage other countries to help generate forward momentum on Syria, given UN members have a collective responsibility to protect the world’s vulnerable and weak when others cannot or will not. Two years ago, Canadians were shocked by the brutal attack that took place in and around Parliament that claimed the life of Corporal Nathan Cirillo and injured others. This vicious attack, at the very heart of our democracy, sought to frighten and divide Canadians.  Instead it had the exact opposite effect, drawing us closer together and making us stronger.  In the wake of this deadly assault, parliamentarians and Canadians united in condemning terrorism and further embracing our diversity. The whole country honoured first responders – Senate and House of Commons Protective Services, the RCMP, former House of Commons Sergeant-at-Arms Kevin Vickers, medical personnel and others – for their bravery and their willingness to put themselves in harm’s way for Canadians of all backgrounds and faiths. It showed the world that Canada will not be intimidated by hatred and violence, but will meet these acts with strength and conviction.  This also showed me yet again that our diversity and collective love of democracy are what make our country strong and our nation great. I join all Canadians today in mourning the loss of Corporal Cirillo and Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent – who was killed two days earlier in an attack in Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, Quebec. These two members of the Canadian Armed Forces made the ultimate sacrifice for the country they loved.  The most fitting tribute that we can pay them is defending the values that they so personified. When I addressed the United Nations (UN) General Assembly for the first time as Prime Minister this past September, I made Canada’s position clear: the world needs to focus on what brings us together and not what divides us. Canada firmly believes that the UN is essential to addressing many of the world’s most pressing challenges – from fighting climate change, mass migration, poverty and disease, to securing peace and stability in a turbulent world. Canada and Canadians have a storied past working with the UN, from helping draft the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to helping resolve the Suez Canal crisis, to taking leadership roles in peacekeeping, environmental protection, and fighting AIDS in Africa. The UN and the essential work it does for humanity is once more a priority for Canada.  We recently ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, and remain committed to playing a major role in peacekeeping and conflict prevention efforts. On this day, let us pause to reflect on all that the UN has accomplished for the world, and celebrate the employees of its many affiliated programmes, funds, and specialized agencies who work tirelessly to make our global community a safer, more prosperous place.  The UN is a vital organization, unparalleled in scope, that is a source of great optimism for a better tomorrow. Today, we join Hindu, Sikh, Jain, and Buddhist communities across Canada and around the world to celebrate Diwali and Bandi Chhor Divas. This holiday – known as the Festival of Lights – reflects the triumph of good over evil and celebrates the power of knowledge and hope over ignorance and despair.  It is also a time of contemplation and an opportunity to reflect on how to help those less fortunate. As we light diyas, share meals, and exchange gifts, we are reminded that Canada’s unique diversity is a blessing.  Diwali brings some of the world’s great faiths together, and celebrates our shared values of respect, inclusion, and pluralism. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a very happy Diwali and Bandi Chhor Divas!The people of Yukon have chosen to elect a government led by the Yukon Liberal Party. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I offer my sincere congratulations to Sandy Silver and all Members of the Legislative Assembly on their electoral victory. I look forward to working with the new government of Yukon, in a spirit of cooperation and collaboration, to build a strong middle class, and a solid foundation for a sustainable economic future in the North.  By working closely together, we can help create stronger communities, improve the well-being of Indigenous peoples, and address shared challenges. I would like to extend my sincere thanks to Darrell Pasloski for his contributions to the territory and to Canada during his time as Premier.  I wish him all the best in his future endeavours. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to congratulate Donald J.  Trump on his election as the next President of the United States. Canada has no closer friend, partner, and ally than the United States.  We look forward to working very closely with President-elect Trump, his administration, and with the United States Congress in the years ahead, including on issues such as trade, investment, and international peace and security. The relationship between our two countries serves as a model for the world.   Our shared values, deep cultural ties, and strong integrated economies will continue to provide the basis for advancing our strong and prosperous partnership. It is with deep sorrow that I learned today of the death of the legendary Leonard Cohen. A most remarkable Montrealer, Leonard Cohen managed to reach the highest of artistic achievement, both as an acclaimed poet and a world-renowned singer-songwriter.  He will be fondly remembered for his gruff vocals, his self-deprecating humour and the haunting lyrics that made his songs the perennial favourite of so many generations. Leonard Cohen is as relevant today as he was in the 1960s.  His ability to conjure the vast array of human emotion made him one of the most influential and enduring musicians ever.  His style transcended the vagaries of fashion. Leonard Cohen was made a Companion of the Order of Canada in 2003 and received many artistic honours during his lifetime, including being inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame, the Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame, and the American Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. He received a Lifetime Achievement Grammy in 2010 and was awarded the Glenn Gould Prize for lifetime achievement in the arts in 2011.   In 2013, with a career already spanning more than fifty years, he won Junos as Artist of the Year and Songwriter of the Year for his 2012 album Old Ideas.  His music had withstood the test of time. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I wish to express our deepest sympathies to Leonard Cohen’s family, friends, colleagues and many, many fans. Leonard, no other artist's poetry and music felt or sounded quite like yours.  We'll miss you. Today, we pause to remember and honour the Canadian men and women who have served our country and fought for freedom around the world. Time may fade, but our memories cannot.  We all have a duty to hold the torch high, and to keep its flame alight.  Liberty’s cause beats deeply within our hearts, and every generation of Canadians has answered the call to serve. We must remember that, during the First and Second World Wars, Canada and Newfoundland fought side by side.  This year marks the 100th anniversary of the Battle of Beaumont-Hamel, when a generation of Newfoundlanders laid down their lives in defence of the freedom, democracy, and diversity that we enjoy today. From Ypres to Vimy Ridge, Dieppe to Juno Beach – we will not forget.  From Korea to the Suez, Cyprus to Kandahar – we will not forget.  We remember yesterday’s youth, far from home, who fought for reason and progress.  They stood up to tyranny and stood for liberty, and sacrificed their future for the future of so many. We honour Canada’s bravest, who stand shoulder to shoulder with our allies around the world.  Every day, they face down the threat of terrorism, and protect the values we cherish most. At 11:00 am, I encourage all Canadians – no matter where you are – to observe the two minutes of silence.  When we remember, we must remember war as it was and as it is.  Freedom’s terrible price is known but to the few who have fought for it. That is why today we stand sombre and silent, with poppies close to our hearts, and take the time to remember. Lest we forget. Canadian entrepreneurs work hard every day to transform new ideas into market-ready products and services that they export to the world, while creating job opportunities here at home that grow our middle class, strengthen our communities, and shape the course of our country’s future. Global Entrepreneurship Week celebrates their ingenuity, hard work, and enormous contributions to our nation’s prosperity and economic security.  This week is also an opportunity for aspiring entrepreneurs to connect with collaborators, mentors, and investors, and explore ways to turn their dreams into reality. The Government of Canada is committed to helping Canadian entrepreneurs grow their businesses and thrive – here at home and abroad.  We know that our entrepreneurs and small business owners are essential to creating the economy – and the well-paying jobs – of the future.  That is why we are investing in programs that support innovation and skills training, including for women, Indigenous, and young entrepreneurs.  That is also why we are negotiating new trade agreements with traditional and new partners around the world.  The recently signed Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement will create new job opportunities and help grow our middle class and those working hard to join it. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to celebrate our entrepreneurs by participating in events during this important week.  We thank the official host of Global Entrepreneurship Week in Canada – Futurpreneur Canada – and wish them every success with this year’s activities. Today, Sikhs in Canada and around the world celebrate the birth of Guru Nanak Dev Ji. To mark this happy occasion, Sikh families and loved ones celebrate and reflect on the teachings of the founder of Sikhism. Let us be inspired by his teachings of equality, unity, selflessness, service, and social justice.  In meeting with Sikhs across the country, I see these teachings upheld to this day. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the significant contributions of the Sikh community to our national fabric, and wish all those celebrating the birth of Guru Nanak Dev Ji a peaceful and joyous day. Every day, I am energized by the potential of Canada’s young people.  I am equally concerned by the challenges they face, and deeply aware that the decisions we make today will shape the world they will one day inherit. That is why, on National Child Day, I encourage all Canadians to celebrate our children and youth, and to reflect on the obligation that we have to our children and grandchildren. Each child deserves to be raised in an environment that is free of violence, discrimination, and exploitation; to grow up with proper nutrition, health care, and a good education; and to have a voice in matters that affect them, and a real, fair chance to succeed. The Government of Canada remains committed to programs that help every child get the best possible start in life and reach their full potential.  Here, at home, we are giving Canadian families more money to help with the high cost of raising their kids through the new Canada Child Benefit, which stands to lift about 300,000 children out of poverty.  We are also working with our international partners to create environments where all children are treated with dignity and respect, and given all the opportunities they need to succeed. ‘While the world has made significant progress in advancing children’s rights since the introduction of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, there is still a lot of work to do.  Millions of children and young people continue to be denied basic human rights – including education, primary health care, and personal security.  Many more are forced into early marriages, recruited as child soldiers, or become victims of child labour. On this day, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to join us in celebrating National Child Day by speaking to children of all ages about their rights.  We also urge you to visit the National Child Day website for activities and events in your communities marking this special day. Canada’s future is only as strong and boundless as the dreams and aspirations of our children and youth.  We must support them in everything they do and want to be. Violence against women is not a women’s issue.  Men must boldly work alongside women to combat this violence – and not simply because they have wives, daughters, or sisters.  Women deserve the full depth of respect, safety, and dignity, regardless of their relationships with men. To change the prevalence of this violence, we must first challenge the attitudes and behaviours that allow this violence to exist, and that allow disrespect for and abuse of women to become commonplace.  We must teach our daughters and sons the importance of gender equality and the need to treat everyone with equal respect. That is why the Government of Canada is investing in several programs both in Canada and around the world to help promote gender equality, support efforts to prevent gender-based violence, and stop human trafficking. Today and throughout the 16 Days of Activism Against Gender-Based Violence, I encourage all Canadians not only to think about how their actions matter, but also to stand up against gender-based violence.  Get started by joining the conversation online using the hashtag #ActionsMatter.  Together, we can create a world that does not tolerate violence against women. It is with deep sorrow that I learned today of the death of Cuba’s longest serving President. Fidel Castro was a larger than life leader who served his people for almost half a century.  A legendary revolutionary and orator, Mr.  Castro made significant improvements to the education and healthcare of his island nation. While a controversial figure, both Mr.  Castro’s supporters and detractors recognized his tremendous dedication and love for the Cuban people who had a deep and lasting affection for el Comandante. I know my father was very proud to call him a friend and I had the opportunity to meet Fidel when my father passed away.  It was also a real honour to meet his three sons and his brother President Raúl Castro during my recent visit to Cuba. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family, friends and many, many supporters of Mr.  Castro.  We join the people of Cuba today in mourning the loss of this remarkable leader. Today, we commemorate one of the darkest chapters in human history: the forced starvation of millions of Ukrainians by the tyrannical regime of Joseph Stalin in the early 1930s.  This genocidal act was designed to destroy the identity and will of the Ukrainian people.  It did not achieve its aim.  Despite the brutality of the Holodomor, Ukrainians endured and, after decades of Soviet control, Ukraine achieved its independence in 1991. Canada stands firm with the Ukrainian people in condemning the atrocities of the Holodomor, and ensuring that its victims are not forgotten.  We also remain committed to supporting Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity as well as the important steps taken by the Ukrainian government to bring greater security, prosperity, and economic independence to their people. I invite all Canadians to take time today to remember those who suffered as a result of the Holodomor and to reflect on the important contributions citizens of Ukrainian descent have made all across Canada.  Their resilience and determination have helped build Canada’s diverse society, which is our strength and pride. On behalf of all Canadians, I congratulate the Ottawa Redblacks on their 2016 Grey Cup victory over the Calgary Stampeders in Toronto, Ontario.  I also applaud both teams for having won their respective division championships. The Grey Cup is one of our country’s most popular sporting events, and this year was no different with millions of Canadians tuned in to watch the game from coast to coast to coast.  Even on a plane flying back from Madagascar, Africa, I was following the game as best I could, getting updates from my staff. Finally, congratulations to both teams and the Canadian Football League for providing another great season full of memorable moments in sport, and to the organizers and hosts of this year’s successful Grey Cup championship game. On behalf of all Canadians, I would like to congratulate Lieutenant-General Chris Whitecross on being appointed as Commandant of the NATO Defense College. Her appointment to this prestigious position speaks volumes of her leadership, professionalism and training, and reflects very well on both the Canadian Armed Forces and our country. Over the course of her career, Lieutenant-General Whitecross has served as a role model and a strong voice for female leadership and gender equality in the military. I am both confident in her abilities and reassured that she will be playing a pivotal role in preparing NATO’s top officers and civilian personnel for the challenges that lie ahead for the Alliance. Lieutenant-General Whitecross is the third Canadian to be Commandant of the College and the first female Commandant in the 65-year history of the school.  Her appointment is yet another milestone in Canada’s proud history with NATO, a vital defence organization that we will continue to strongly support. I was profoundly saddened to learn yesterday of the tragic accident that took the life of Captain Thomas McQueen of the Royal Canadian Air Force as he was training at the Cold Lake Air Weapons Range. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family, friends, and colleagues of Captain McQueen. This accident is another painful reminder of the dangers that members of the Canadian Armed Forces face every day to ensure the safety and security of our citizens.  Their courage, their bravery, and the sacrifices they make represent the very best of what it means to be Canadian.  I would also like to thank all first responders for their efforts on that tragic day. A proud member of 401 Tactical Fighter Squadron, Captain McQueen lost his life in the line of duty.  His sacrifice will be honoured and remembered by all Canadians. Let us pause on World AIDS Day to remember the many people in Canada and around the world who have been lost to HIV/AIDS, and to renew our commitment to eliminating this disease in the years to come. Today, and every day, we extend our compassion and kindness to everyone who is affected – not only those we have lost, but also those who are still living, including families. Tens of thousands of Canadians are living with HIV, and over 36 million people worldwide are HIV-positive.  Thanks to major advances in treatment and care, people diagnosed today are able to live with hope in ways not possible in decades past.  Still, much work remains to be done to promote education, prevention, treatment, care, and to find a cure. During the Fifth Replenishment Conference of the Global Fund, which Canada hosted in Montréal earlier this year, the Government of Canada pledged $804 million to international efforts to fight AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis.  At home, we are investing in the work of Canadian HIV/AIDS researchers, as well as community-based organizations to prevent new infections and ensure people living with HIV have access to treatment, care and support.  We will continue to lead by example and help put an end to this serious, but preventable infection. Finally, we all have a responsibility to do what we can to remove stigma and discrimination around HIV.  All people living with HIV/AIDS, be they men, women, children, youth or trans persons deserve to be respected, and we must all challenge any negative attitudes or assumptions towards those living with this condition. The fight against HIV/AIDS is a winnable one.  I encourage all Canadians to support efforts to raise awareness about HIV/AIDS prevention through the UN-led #HIVPrevention campaign.  By working together with researchers, activists, civil society, other countries, and the courageous people living with HIV/AIDS around the world, we can bring this global epidemic to an end. •On the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, we celebrate the contributions made by persons with disabilities to our country, and recommit ourselves to building a Canada that is truly inclusive and equal. Around the world, far too many persons with disabilities still face major barriers – stigma, discrimination, limited accessibility, even denial of basic human rights – to fully participate in society. Here at home we are trying to do our part to address this challenge.  Over the last several months, Minister Carla Qualtrough – Canada’s first ever federal minister of persons with disabilities – has consulted across the country on planned accessibility legislation to promote equality of opportunity and increase the inclusion and participation of Canadians who have disabilities or functional limitations.  I welcome everyone to partake in these consultations, which will continue until the end of February 2017. Today, and every day, let us take action to break down the barriers that exclude Canadians with disabilities.  We cannot rest until persons with disabilities have the same opportunities as everyone else. Twenty-seven years ago today, 14 young women were murdered at l'École Polytechnique de Montréal simply because they were women. On this somber anniversary, let us reflect on what Canadians – women, men, and youth – can do to rid the country and the planet of the scourges of misogyny and gender-based violence. The statistics on violence against girls and women are unacceptable.  Far too many girls and women, here in Canada and around the world, suffer physical and psychological harm at the hands of others – often people they love and trust. On this day – and every day – we recommit ourselves to finding solutions that help prevent future acts of violence.  Men and boys are a vital part of the solution to change attitudes and behaviours that allow for this violence to exist.  There must be zero tolerance for violence against women, and only with everyone’s support can we build a Canada that is safe for all. That is why the Government of Canada is investing in several programs, both in Canada and around the world, to help promote gender equality by supporting education and prevention efforts, as well as helping those who have been targeted by gender-based violence.  For example, we will continue to grow and maintain Canada’s network of shelters and transition houses, so no one fleeing domestic violence is left without a place to turn. As we mourn today with the families and friends of those bright and talented young women who were victims of that senseless act of hatred, I encourage everyone to think about how their own personal actions matter.  Start by joining the conversation online using the hashtag #ActionsMatter.  Together we can change minds and stop gender-based violence before it starts. Tonight, Canadians will gather on Parliament Hill for the official illumination ceremony of the Christmas Lights Across Canada program, kicking off the holiday season. These lights illuminate our nation’s capital and provincial and territorial capitals across the country.  They connect our communities and represent the values that bring us together – those of peace, unity, and confidence in the future. This year, the Christmas Lights Across Canada tradition holds special significance as we count down towards the 150th anniversary of Confederation in 2017. As we share the holiday season with family and friends, let us take a moment to reflect on how fortunate we are to call Canada home.  Let us also remember the brave women and men of the Canadian Armed Forces, and their families, who make incredible sacrifices for our country each and every day. Finally, I encourage all Canadians to warmly welcome those who have recently arrived in Canada as they experience the Canadian holiday season – and a Canadian winter – for the first time.  We are neighbours who look out for each other, and lending a hand to those in need is at heart of the holiday season. A humanitarian disaster is taking place before our very eyes.  Some 200,000 civilians, including many children, in eastern Aleppo are cut off from food and medicine supplies.  Aleppo is being subjected to daily bombings and artillery attacks by the Syrian regime, supported by Russia and Iran.  Hospitals and schools have not been spared.  Rather, they appear to be the targets of attack in an attempt to wear people down.  The images of dying children are heart breaking.  We condemn the actions of the Syrian regime and its foreign backers, especially Russia, for their obstruction of humanitarian aid, and strongly condemn the Syrian regime’s attacks that have devastated civilians and medical facilities and use of barrel bombs and chemical weapons. The urgent need now is for an immediate ceasefire to allow the United Nations to get humanitarian assistance to people in eastern Aleppo and to provide humanitarian relief to those who have fled eastern Aleppo.  The opposition have agreed the UN’s 4-point plan for Aleppo.  The regime needs to agree (to) the plan too.  We call on the Syrian regime to do this urgently to alleviate the dire situation in Aleppo; and call on Russia and Iran to use their influence to help make this happen. We urge all parties in Syria to adhere to international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions.  UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has spoken about war crimes being committed in Syria.  There must not be impunity for those responsible.  We call on the UN to investigate respective reports and gather evidence to hold the perpetrators of war crimes to account.  We are ready to consider additional restrictive measures against individuals and entities that act for or on behalf of the Syrian regime. At the same time, Russia is blocking the UN Security Council, which is therefore unable to do its work and put an end to the atrocities.  The regime’s refusal to engage in a serious political process also highlights the unwillingness of both Russia and Iran to work for a political solution despite their assurances to the contrary.  We support the efforts of the UN Special Envoy (Staffan) de Mistura to resume the political process through negotiations.  Only a political settlement can bring peace for people in Syria. As referenced in the Elders’ Statement delivered today by Elmer Courchene: ‘With our spiritual laws, practices, experiences and relationships with our lands and territories, First Nations have a vital role in defending and healing Mother Earth.  This is our obligation. ’Canada and the Assembly of First Nations (AFN) recognize that First Nations are climate leaders.  First Nations have demonstrated great resiliency.  They are among the most vulnerable to a rapidly changing environment due to significant social, cultural, ecological, and economic impacts and historic failure to respect First Nations rights.  Together, Canada and First Nations will collaborate on climate change action to limit its impacts, and transition to a cleaner economy that will create more opportunities for First Nations throughout the country, including in remote, coastal and northern communities.  We agree to work together to ensure First Nations are full and effective partners in advancing clean growth and addressing climate change.  This will be done through robust, ongoing and meaningful engagement based on recognition of rights, respect, cooperation and partnership, consistent with the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, including free, prior and informed consent. The AFN, through the Advisory Committee on Climate Action and the Environment, will begin its discussions on a First Nations-led climate plan that prioritizes First Nations issues, rights and interests. Therefore, in taking action on climate change and in moving forward on the implementation of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, a structured, collaborative approach for meaningful engagement will be pursued between the Government of Canada and First Nations.  This will ensure that First Nations are full and effective partners in advancing clean growth and achieving climate change goals to mitigate and reduce emissions as a necessary precursor to the mitigation of climate impacts on First Nations.  The Framework builds on the Paris Agreement and reinforces that the rights of First Nations need to be recognized and respected when taking action to address climate change.  Our partnership and engagement reflects our joint commitment to renewing the relationship between the Government of Canada and First Nations on a nation-to-nation basis. First Nations across the country are demonstrating climate leadership, and are active drivers of positive change towards a cleaner environment to the benefit of all Canadians.  Working together on climate change and the implementation of this Framework is another step toward reconciliation between Canada and First Nations, and will help build a more sustainable, prosperous and inclusive country for all. As referenced in the Elders’ Statement delivered today by Elmer Courchene: ‘With our spiritual laws, practices, experiences and relationships with our lands and territories, First Nations have a vital role in defending and healing Mother Earth.  This is our obligation. ’Canada and the Assembly of First Nations (AFN) recognize that First Nations are climate leaders.  First Nations have demonstrated great resiliency.  They are among the most vulnerable to a rapidly changing environment due to significant social, cultural, ecological, and economic impacts and historic failure to respect First Nations rights.  Together, Canada and First Nations will collaborate on climate change action to limit its impacts, and transition to a cleaner economy that will create more opportunities for First Nations throughout the country, including in remote, coastal and northern communities.  We agree to work together to ensure First Nations are full and effective partners in advancing clean growth and addressing climate change.  This will be done through robust, ongoing and meaningful engagement based on recognition of rights, respect, cooperation and partnership, consistent with the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, including free, prior and informed consent. The AFN, through the Advisory Committee on Climate Action and the Environment, will begin its discussions on a First Nations-led climate plan that prioritizes First Nations issues, rights and interests. Therefore, in taking action on climate change and in moving forward on the implementation of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, a structured, collaborative approach for meaningful engagement will be pursued between the Government of Canada and First Nations.  This will ensure that First Nations are full and effective partners in advancing clean growth and achieving climate change goals to mitigate and reduce emissions as a necessary precursor to the mitigation of climate impacts on First Nations.  The Framework builds on the Paris Agreement and reinforces that the rights of First Nations need to be recognized and respected when taking action to address climate change.  Our partnership and engagement reflects our joint commitment to renewing the relationship between the Government of Canada and First Nations on a nation-to-nation basis. First Nations across the country are demonstrating climate leadership, and are active drivers of positive change towards a cleaner environment to the benefit of all Canadians.  Working together on climate change and the implementation of this Framework is another step toward reconciliation between Canada and First Nations, and will help build a more sustainable, prosperous and inclusive country for all. Sophie and I offer our best wishes today to His Highness the Aga Khan, the spiritual leader of the Shia Imami Ismaili Muslims – a community that includes tens of thousands in Canada and millions around the world. For more than fifty years, His Highness has worked tirelessly to reduce hunger, poverty, disease, and illiteracy in developing countries.  He is a beacon of acceptance and compassion, and an inspiration to both his community and the world. Canada has come to share a close relationship with the Aga Khan and bestowed honorary citizenship on him in 2009.  I am proud to call His Highness both a mentor and friend.  He has shown time and time again that no matter our faith, where we were born, what colour is our skin, or what language we speak, we are equal members of this world. Today, we salute the tremendous efforts that the Aga Khan has undertaken over his lifetime to help those most vulnerable, and wish him health and happiness on this special day. On behalf of all Canadians, I would like to congratulate Mr.  Paolo Gentiloni on his appointment as Italy’s new Prime Minister. Canada and Italy have rich and historical ties underpinned by close people-to-people bonds.  I look forward to working with Prime Minister Gentiloni on deepening relations between our two countries. I would also like to thank outgoing Prime Minister Renzi for being such a good friend to Canada during his time as leader, especially for his support on the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement.  I wish him well in his future endeavours. Last year, I committed to a renewed relationship with Indigenous Peoples, one based on the recognition of rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership.  Today, we take further steps on the journey of reconciliation. First, we will create permanent bilateral mechanisms with the Assembly of First Nations (AFN) and First Nations, the Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami and the four Inuit Nunangat Regions, and the Métis National Council and its governing members.  In this Kelowna-like process, every year, we will meet to develop policy on shared priorities, and monitor our progress going forward.  Similar meetings with key Cabinet Ministers will take place at least twice each year. Second, we will establish an Interim Board of Directors to make recommendations on the creation of a National Council for Reconciliation.  The Interim Board will begin an engagement process to develop recommendations on the scope and mandate of the National Council. Third, we will provide $10 million to support the important work of the National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation located at the University of Manitoba, as recommended in Call to Action 78.  This contribution will help to ensure that the history and legacy of Canada’s residential school system is remembered. These announcements build on progress we have made together over the past year.  Work is underway on 41 of the Calls to Action outlined in the Final Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission that fall under federal or shared purview. While much more remains to be done, I believe that we are making real progress towards renewing our relationship with Indigenous Peoples. I was shocked and saddened to learn of the death of a Canadian and the injury of her son in a terrorist attack that took place in Karak, Jordan, that has left several dead and many more injured. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of all the victims of this heinous act of violence.  We pray that those injured will have a complete and speedy recovery. Our embassy personnel in Amman are providing consular assistance and are working with Jordanian officials in this tragic situation. This is a sad reminder of the very real threat of terrorism around the globe and of the need to continue working closely with trusted allies such as Jordan to help prevent horrific attacks of this nature.  The people of Canada stand in solidarity with all Jordanians during this difficult time. The Government of Canada will not comment further at this time out of respect for the family. Merry Christmas, Canada!The holiday season is truly my favourite time of the year.  As we come together with loved ones, let us reflect on how fortunate we are to call this beautiful country home. Living in Canada comes with a responsibility to be there for each other – and not just during this time of year, but each and every day.  After all, Canadians helping others – no matter the distance that separates them – is what this country is all about. When tragedy struck Fort McMurray, and thousands of Canadians were forced to leave their homes, thousands more came together to make sure evacuated families had a place to stay, clothes to wear, and food to eat. Today, as Canadians continue to welcome Syrian refugees, we open our hearts and homes to those most in need.  Together, we demonstrate that better is always possible and that, in difficult times, we are at our very best. So, during this season of hope, let us reach out to those who are hurting most.  Let us give back in whatever way we can, and make sure this holiday season is a happy time for everyone.  There is no holiday tradition more timeless than that. I also ask you take a moment to remember the brave women and men of the Canadian Armed Forces – and their families – who make incredible sacrifices to protect our country. As we look to the new year, and get ready to celebrate Canada’s 150th birthday, I know our best days are yet to come. From Ella-Grace, Hadrien, Xavier, Sophie and me, to your family: Merry Christmas, happy holidays, and all the best in 2017.  At sunset today, the Jewish community in Canada and around the world will welcome the beginning of Hanukkah, the 8-day Festival of Lights. Hanukkah commemorates the struggle of the Jewish people to overcome adversity, and to find light in times of unspeakable suffering.  It teaches us that peace can reign triumphant and that, by working together, we can build a brighter, better world for ourselves and our children. To mark this occasion, family and friends will gather to pray, sing, and light the menorah.  They will enjoy food and tell stories of hopefulness and optimism. On behalf of Sophie and our three children, I invite all our country’s citizens to reflect on the immense contributions that Jewish Canadians make to our nation, and wish all those celebrating a happy and peaceful Hanukkah. Chag Hanukkah SameachBefore we leave 2016 behind, I want to thank you.  Over the last year, we have accomplished a great deal together to strengthen the middle class and those working hard to join it. We cut taxes on middle-class Canadians, and put more money in the pockets of nine out of ten families through a new, more generous Canada Child Benefit; we also signed one of the most progressive free trade deals in history that will benefit Canadians across the country. As we mark Canada 150 over the next year, we will honour the generations of Canadians who have come together to create opportunities for one another.  We will celebrate the courage and vision of those who came before us, and the hard work and ambition of Canadians – like you – who have made Canada the success story that it is today. For my part as Prime Minister, I will always stand against the politics of fear and division, and focus on what brings us together – that is my New Year’s resolution to you. In 2017, and beyond, our government will take further steps to help the middle class and those working hard to join it.  And, together, I know we will continue to build the diverse and prosperous country that we are all so proud to call home. Canada, let's make this year our year. On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish you a wonderful night and all the best in 2017. Canadians from all across this country sent a message that it is time for real change, and I am deeply honoured by the faith they have placed in my team and me.  Canadians chose a positive and optimistic plan for the future, and we will immediately begin implementing our plan for a strong middle class. Today we have the pleasure of introducing the team of extraordinary Canadians who will serve in the new Ministry.  This strong, diverse, and experienced team will serve all Canadians, and for the first time in our country’s history, there will be an equal number of women and men around the Cabinet table.  Canadians expect to see their values and priorities reflected in their government, and we have listened closely to them.  Canadians told us what kind of government they want, and we built the plan to make it happen.  We are committed to investing in our economy, strengthening the middle class, and helping those working hard to join it.  We will invest in job creation and broad-based prosperity to ensure every Canadian has a real and fair chance to succeed.  We will shine more light on government to ensure it remains focused on the people it is meant to serve.  Openness and transparency will be our constant companions, and we will work to restore Canadians’ trust in their government and in our democracy.  We are committed to the highest ethical standards and applying the utmost care in the handling of public funds. We will demonstrate national leadership and work with the provinces and territories to take real action on climate change and create the clean jobs of tomorrow.  We will further strengthen our great country with a renewed, nation-to-nation relationship with Indigenous Peoples, based on a recognition of rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership.  We will fulfil our sacred obligation to Canadian veterans and their families, who have given so much in service to our country.  We are committed to both the security and safety of Canadians and the protection of their rights and freedoms.  We will also reinvest in our cultural and creative industries and create an immigration system grounded in both compassion and economic opportunity. Canada is strong not in spite of its diversity, but because of it, and we are committed to bringing new leadership and a new tone to Ottawa.  We also made a commitment to pursue our goals with a renewed sense of collaboration.  Most importantly, we will be a government that governs for all Canadians and brings Canadians together.  We will work tirelessly to honour the trust Canadians have given us, and together build an even better future for our children and grandchildren. My dear friends, Today, I had the pleasure of introducing our team of extraordinary Canadians who will serve as Ministers in your new government.  As a Canadian, you expect to see your values and priorities reflected in your government – and we have listened closely.  Our strong, diverse, and experienced team will serve all Canadians, and – for the first time in our country’s history – there will be an equal number of women and men around the Cabinet table. Over the course of the campaign, we promised you a government that will bring real change – in both the things we do and the way we do them.  We will immediately start implementing our plan for a strong and growing middle class.  On Election Day, you sent a clear message, and you rightly expect us to fulfill our promises.  I am writing to you, today, to reaffirm my commitment to spend the next four years working hard to deliver on those promises.  It is time for leadership that never seeks to divide Canadians, but takes every single opportunity to bring us together, including in Parliament. We made a commitment to invest in growing our economy, strengthening our middle class, and helping those working hard to join it.  We committed to fighting climate change and protecting our environment.  We made a commitment to provide more direct help to those who need it by giving less to those who do not.  We committed to public investment as the best way to spur growth, job creation, and economic prosperity.  And we committed to a responsible, transparent fiscal plan for challenging economic times.  We expect you to hold the government accountable for delivering these commitments. Our country faces many real and immediate challenges – from a struggling middle class to the threat of climate change.  If we are to overcome these obstacles, Canadians need to have faith in their government’s honesty and willingness to listen.  That is why we committed to set a higher bar for openness and transparency in Ottawa.  Government and its information must be open by default.  Simply put, it is time to shine more light on government to make sure it remains focused on the people it was created to serve – you.  But in order for you to trust your government, you need a government that will trust you.  When we make a mistake – as all governments do – it is important that we acknowledge that mistake and learn from it.  We know that you do not expect us to be perfect – but you expect us to work tirelessly, and to be honest, open, and sincere in our efforts to serve the public interest.  Before the election, we also made a commitment to bring new leadership and a new tone to Ottawa.  Moving forward, we will pursue our goals and objectives with a renewed sense of collaboration.  We fully understand and appreciate that partnerships with provincial, territorial, and municipal governments are vital to deliver the real, positive change that we promised you.  It is also time for a renewed, Nation-to-Nation relationship with Indigenous Peoples, one based on a recognition of rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership.  Not only is this the right thing to do, but it is also a sure path to economic growth.  To close, I am deeply grateful to have this opportunity to serve you – and every Canadian across our great country.  I am committed to leading an open, honest government that is accountable to Canadians, lives up to the highest ethical standards, brings our country together, and applies the utmost care and prudence in the handling of public funds.  Thank you for having faith in me.  Thank you for putting your trust in our team.  We will not let you down. The application for a cross-border permit for the Keystone XL pipeline project was turned down by the United States Government today.  We are disappointed by the decision but respect the right of the United States to make the decision. The Canada-U. S.  relationship is much bigger than any one project and I look forward to a fresh start with President Obama to strengthen our remarkable ties in a spirit of friendship and co-operation. We know that Canadians want a government that they can trust to protect the environment and grow the economy.  The Government of Canada will work hand-in-hand with provinces, territories and like-minded countries to combat climate change, adapt to its impacts, and create the clean jobs of tomorrow. It is with great sadness that I learned of the death of Helmut Schmidt today.  On behalf of all Canadians, I offer my deepest condolences to his family and all the German people. During his tenure as Chancellor of West Germany from 1974–1982, Helmut Schmidt built closer ties among European states and across the Atlantic.  He helped establish the summit of leaders which we now call the Group of Seven (G7), and which remains a vital forum for Canada and our close partners to discuss the world’s most pressing issues.  He stood as a model for courageous engagement in the face of intractable global challenges. Helmut Schmidt was a great friend to Canada, and to my father.  I had the great fortune to meet him a few times when I was younger, and I will never forget the visit he made to my father’s grave in St-Rémi-de-Napierville in 2011. Canada greatly values its enduring relationship with Germany.  We share with the German people their sense of loss of a great statesman. I would like to congratulate the people of Burma for the historic national elections which took place on Sunday, November 8, 2015.  The eagerness and enthusiasm displayed by the Burmese people in exercising their right to vote demonstrates clearly that they are committed to building their young democracy.  Burma’s national electoral commission must also be congratulated for the role it played in bringing these peaceful elections to fruition.  Despite structural challenges in the process, these elections mark an important milestone in Burma's continued transition to a more open and democratic society. Canadian electoral observers will continue to monitor developments as votes are counted and official results become known. We encourage all parties to work together to ensure that any disputes and discrepancies are addressed in a constructive manner and that a peaceful transition to the newly elected government ensues.  The people of Burma deserve nothing less. Today, let us remember and honour the many Canadians who have fought so bravely in defence of our country throughout our history, so that we might enjoy peace, freedom and democracy. Our Canadian Armed Forces have earned tremendous respect for their remarkable contributions to promoting international peace and security.  From coast to coast to coast, we pay special tribute to those who have given their lives in service.  We also honour those Canadians who have worked to prevent the tragedies of war in international peacekeeping operations around the globe. Members of our Armed Forces – past and present – routinely put their lives on the line for our country.  They represent the very best of what it means to be Canadian. We have an obligation to our country’s women and men in uniform, our veterans, and their families.  As a government, we will honour this social covenant with the respect and gratitude it deserves. I call on Canadians to join me in expressing our heartfelt gratitude to all those who have worked and fought so courageously to keep us safe.  Today, and every day, we remain committed to ensuring they have nothing less than the care and support of a grateful nation. We will Remember Them. Today, I join Canada’s Hindu, Sikh, Jain and Buddhist communities in recognizing the occasion of Diwali and Bandi Chhor Divas. Tonight, families and friends take this occasion to reflect on the triumph of good over evil.  Known as the Festival of Lights to many, Diwali is also a celebration of the power of higher knowledge and light to dispel ignorance. This holiday, which stands as an example of Canadian diversity, gives us the occasion  to reflect on the important contributions of all our citizens.  Diwali highlights our shared values of respect and inclusion, and our commitment to freedom and equality.  It is a reminder that Canada is a nation made stronger not in spite of our differences, but because of them. On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish a very happy Diwali and Bandi Chhor Divas to all those observing these holidays with their family and loved ones. I am absolutely delighted that Her Majesty has graciously agreed to this meeting.  As the Queen’s twelfth Canadian Prime Minister, I am honoured and very much look forward to spending this time in conversation with her.  In her role as Queen of Canada, she has not only witnessed but also been an active participant in the evolution of our country over the past sixty-three years.  Her Majesty will remain an integral part of our country’s progress and future. I am shocked and saddened that so many people have been killed and injured today in a number of terrorist attacks in Paris, France, and that many others are being held hostage. As the situation continues to unfold, Sophie and I join all Canadians in extending our deepest condolences to the families and friends of those killed.  It is our sincere hope that the hostages are freed unharmed as soon as possible.  We also wish a speedy recovery to all those who have been injured. Canada stands with France at this dark time and offers all possible assistance.  We will continue to work closely with the international community to help prevent these terrible, senseless acts. Our thoughts and prayers are with the people of France and we mourn their loss. I am deeply disturbed by the fire that took place at the Kawartha Muslim Religious Association’s mosque in Peterborough on November 14, 2015. The values that make our country great are values that celebrate our diversity and our religious tolerance.  Canada is a country that is strong, not in spite of our differences, but because of them.  Muslim-Canadians contribute enormously to the social and economic fabric of our nation, and Canadian authorities will not abide innocent and peaceful citizens being targeted by acts of vandalism and intolerance. The recent terrorist attacks in Paris have shocked peace-loving people in all countries around the world.  We must remain focused on those responsible for the atrocities committed in France.  It is equally important for Canadians to understand that Muslims around the world are also being persecuted regularly by these violent extremists.  We are in this together. To the families who attend the mosque for prayer every week, the Government of Canada and our law enforcement agencies will protect your rights and make every effort to apprehend any perpetrator.  I hope your mosque will be open for prayer again very soon. Following the terrorist attacks in Paris, I have noted with deep regret a number of highly disturbing acts aimed at certain Canadians, including the fire at the mosque in Peterborough, the smashing of windows at a Hindu temple in Kitchener, and the attack on a Muslim woman in Toronto. Diversity is Canada’s strength.  These vicious and senseless acts of intolerance have no place in our country and run absolutely contrary to Canadian values of pluralism and acceptance. The Government of Canada strongly condemns such actions and, along with law enforcement agencies, will protect the rights of innocent Canadians being subjected to such abuse. Canadians understand that religious groups around the world suffer persecution regularly at the hands of violent extremists.  Our focus must be on stopping the people responsible for the terror, and continuing to fight hate by embracing Canadian values. Canadian entrepreneurs are extraordinary individuals who have the crucial determination and vision to transform their ideas into goods and services, which in turn helps to grow our middle class. Global Entrepreneurship Week celebrates the ingenuity and perseverance of our entrepreneurs.  This week offers a broad range of events across the country focused on encouraging Canadian business people to enter into foreign markets. The Government of Canada will invest now to help Canadian entrepreneurs with international expansion by supporting innovation and skills training, as well as reducing the federal small business tax rate.  We will work to ensure businesses and entrepreneurs can succeed, grow, and innovate. This year’s Global Entrepreneur Week celebrations, hosted by Futurpreneur Canada, include a variety of events across the country that help ambitious business people connect with potential collaborators, mentors, and investors on the world stage. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish all Canadian entrepreneurs a great week, and thank them for using their skills and energy to drive Canadian innovation and global economic competition. I think that one of the most rewarding things about being Prime Minister of Canada is having the ability to make a real difference in the lives of children in our own country and around the world.  Each child deserves to be raised in a world free of discrimination, violence, and exploitation, and each one deserves to grow up with proper nutrition and health care, a good education, and safe communities. As we look back exactly 26 years to when the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child was adopted and opened for signature, we can see that real progress has been made in moving the markers forward for young people around the globe.  But there is still an enormous amount of work to be done, from reducing preventable diseases to feeding the undernourished, from freeing those being forced to do child labour to ending child, early, and forced marriage, and from rehabilitating former child soldiers to sheltering the millions displaced as a result of conflicts and hunger. These children need our help.  The Government of Canada will continue to sponsor programs around the world that help boys and girls grow up healthy and reach their full potential.  That is also why Canada is taking in families of Syrian refugees. Here at home, the Government of Canada will give families more money to help with the high cost of raising their kids.  We will provide direct help to students from low- and middle-income families to help them pay for their education and ensure that debt loads are manageable.  We will also do our part to help Canadian children live healthier lives, with less exposure to known health risks. By encouraging our nation's most valuable asset – our youth – to be agents of positive change, we are helping them become the leaders of today and tomorrow. As a father and a former school teacher, I know that one of our greatest responsibilities is to help our children become engaged, healthy, and successful.  As Prime Minister, I remain committed to helping all of our children achieve their potential. Today, I join Canadians – and people around the world – in recognizing the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women. Violence against women is a violation of the most basic human rights.  It destroys lives, tears families apart, impacts entire communities, and has no place within our society. Today serves as an important reminder that women and girls – particularly indigenous women and girls – continue to be vulnerable to violence in our society.  This must change. That is why the Government of Canada will continue to raise awareness of violence against women, help prevent it, and support the victims who have experienced it, both here at home and around the world. As leaders, as parents, as community members, we need to make sure we are combating misogyny in all its forms, wherever it is found. On this day, I urge all Canadians to make a commitment to stopping violence against women and girls.  You can start by taking the online pledge to #EndViolence at women. gc. caTogether, we can create a Canada and a world where all citizens are respected, valued equally, and safe from violence. Sophie and I offer our warmest of wishes to everyone in Canada – and around the world – celebrating the birth of Guru Nanak Dev Ji. The values of the faith he taught – love, compassion, serving humanity and the community – are evident every day in Sikh families and communities across Canada. I have been fortunate enough to visit many communities from coast to coast to coast, and I have seen first-hand just how much Sikh Canadians continue to contribute to Canada’s rich culture and heritage.  Their story, and the story of Guru Nanak, serve as an important reminder that we are stronger not in spite of our differences, but because of them. Once again I wish all those celebrating the birth of Guru Nanak Dev Ji a peaceful and joyous day. One of the darkest chapters of human history, the Holodomor, occurred over eighty years ago between 1932 and 1933.  The Holodomor was the systemic and horrific genocide of millions of Ukrainians by a totalitarian Soviet regime.  Children, women, and men were starved and executed for nothing more than trying to speak their language, maintain their culture, keep their land, and live in peace. While the Holodomor tried to break the Ukrainian people, they endured, persevered, and ultimately won their independence.  Their descendants continue to make immeasurable contributions in countries around the world – including right here in Canada. Today, we stand with Ukrainians in denouncing the historical atrocities committed against them, and in support of their enduring right to self-determination, freedom, and democracy.  To this end, the Government of Canada stands firmly against Russia’s ongoing military aggression in Ukraine.  We believe that, along with the international community, Canada can play an important part in bringing this conflict to an end.  As a country, we also remain committed to helping rebuild the democratic, economic, and security institutions that will help Ukraine flourish once more. On this sombre anniversary, we pause to remember the victims, families, and communities who suffered as a result of the Holodomor, and we strengthen our resolve to continue promoting and upholding basic freedoms, rights, and dignity to help ensure that atrocities like this never happen again. I was very saddened to learn of the death of Maurice Strong.  On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to his family, friends, and colleagues. Mr Strong was an internationally recognized environmentalist and philanthropist who used his remarkable business acumen, organizational skills, and humanity to make the world a better place. In his career he took on extraordinarily challenging positions at the United Nations, including Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment.  He was also first Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, Executive Co-ordinator of the United Nations Office for Emergency Operations in Africa, and was a member of the World Commission on Environment and Development. More recently, Mr.  Strong was Secretary-General of the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.  He was a driving force behind achieving the Kyoto Protocol.  In addition, he was considered a legend at the Canadian International Development Agency that he headed earlier in his career. For his work, Mr.  Strong received numerous conservation and humanitarian awards as well as honorary doctorates from multiple universities.  He was a Companion of the Order of Canada and a member of the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada. Mr.  Strong was a global pioneer of sustainable development who left our country and our world a better place.  His accomplishments will be remembered and honoured for years to come. On behalf of all Canadians, I congratulate the Edmonton Eskimos on winning the 103rd Grey Cup over the Ottawa REDBLACKS at Investors Group Field in Winnipeg, Manitoba. Both teams should be very proud of their remarkable seasons – they have taken their fans on a wild ride over the past six months. The Grey Cup continues to be one of Canada’s most popular sporting events, drawing hundreds of thousands of fans from across our great country each year.  It is steeped in tradition that traces its roots all the way back to 1909, when Governor General Earl Grey donated the first Grey Cup to the Canadian Football League. As the Edmonton Eskimos take home the historic cup once more, I think of all the youth who have drawn inspiration from this year’s players, and who dream of one day winning Canadian football’s highest honour.  Let me once again offer congratulations to both teams and to the CFL on another great season. Newfoundlanders and Labradorians have chosen to elect a majority government led by the Liberal Party of Newfoundland and Labrador. On behalf of our government, I would like to convey my sincerest congratulations to Dwight Ball on his election victory. I look forward to working with the new government of Newfoundland and Labrador to create jobs, grow our economy, strengthen our middle class, bolster health care services, improve the well-being of Indigenous peoples, and safeguard our environment. I believe that confronting our collective challenges can only be achieved by sitting down together and engaging in open dialogue, and I look forward to the opportunity to work with Premier-designate Ball. I would also like to thank the outgoing Premier, Paul Davis, for his many years of public service. World AIDS Day is an opportunity for us to unite with the global community to raise awareness about HIV and AIDS, to stand in solidarity with those living with the virus, and to remember those who have died. Almost three decades after the first World AIDS Day was held, we are now at a point where we can envision a future free of this terrible disease. We thank the Canadian researchers and doctors who have played such an important role in the medical advancements that have revolutionized the prevention and treatment of HIV, making it possible for many diagnosed with the infection to live full lives. We must also honour the dedicated members of our communities who work to prevent HIV/AIDS, reduce stigma and discrimination in its many forms, and help people get the care, treatment, and support they need. While unprecedented efforts have yielded impressive results, work continues toward preventing new infections, providing access to treatment for all who suffer around the world, and discovering a cure. Today, we reflect on the history of our global efforts against HIV and AIDS, and look forward to a time when future generations will never have to experience the loss, hurt, and isolation of this preventable and treatable condition.  In order to build a country that works for everyone, you need a strong and diverse team.  Today I have the pleasure of announcing that 35 remarkable Canadians will be taking on new and expanded responsibilities.  These highly motivated individuals, who come from a variety of backgrounds and communities across our great country, bring a wealth of talent and experience to the table that will complement existing Cabinet strengths. Canadians voted for new leadership and a new tone in Ottawa.  They told us what is important to them and our whole team will work together with other parliamentarians, other orders of government, and Indigenous communities to deliver a plan to address their priorities.  We are focused on growth for the middle class, open and transparent government, a sustainable environment and economy, further strengthening Canada’s diversity, and balancing security and opportunity. Each Minister has been assigned a parliamentary secretary to work hand-in-hand with them.  Additionally, we will be introducing legislation to formalize the equal status of our ministerial team sitting around the Cabinet table. I am also pleased to announce the appointment of Ginette Petitpas Taylor, as Deputy Government Whip, and Arnold Chan, as Deputy Government House Leader. Our extraordinary team of Canadians will work tirelessly to honour the trust Canadians have given us.  Together, we will build an even better future for our children and grandchildren. As we launch the Christmas Lights Across Canada program, we should all take a moment to reflect on how fortunate we are to call this great country home.  During the cold winter days ahead, let us find time to reach out to family, friends, and our communities to celebrate all of the blessings we enjoy. The lights illuminated in our nation’s capital – and in provincial and territorial capitals across the country – link us together and serve as a powerful symbol of our Canadian values of peace, unity, and hope for the future. We look forward to the upcoming holiday season and to all of the heart-warming traditions we will soon share together.  We also send our warmest wishes to those friends and family members, including those serving with our Canadian Armed Forces, who are unable to be with us.  While far away, you are with us in our thoughts. I am pleased to announce that the Honourable George Furey has been appointed to the role of Speaker of the Senate of Canada. Senator Furey brings a wealth of experience to the Upper Chamber that will help to restore this proud Canadian institution, allowing it to focus more effectively on the priorities Canadians are facing today. Canadians must have confidence that their democratic institutions will respond to their needs.  I believe that Senator Furey will promote respectful, productive deliberations among Senators and ensure strong accountability to Canadians. Senator Furey will also preside over the Senate as it undergoes an important change to become a more independent, less partisan chamber.  As announced today, we are standing by our commitment and creating a new, non-partisan, merit-based process that will advise me on Senate appointments.  Today we begin restoring the trust of Canadians in this public institution. I congratulate Senator Furey on this appointment and look forward to working with him and all Senators to build a more open and accountable government and an even stronger Canada.  Today Canada joins countries around the world in recognizing the 23rd anniversary of the International Day of Persons with Disabilities. We know that there are still far too many persons with disabilities who face social and economic barriers to realizing their potential and being fully active participants in society.  Too often, persons with disabilities are confronted with stigma, discrimination and, ultimately, denied the most basic human rights.  We will work to ensure the full diversity of Canadians is reflected in their government and in its decisions. This day serves as an important reminder to us all of the determination shown on a daily basis by persons with disabilities in their quest for inclusion and equal treatment.  It is also an occasion to become more educated about what we can do to promote and advocate for persons with disabilities. We have a duty to help eliminate the systemic barriers that persist in our society, and we will work with the provinces, territories and others to make sure that all Canadians have equality of opportunity. I want to extend my warm congratulations to my colleague, Geoff Regan, on being elected as the new Speaker of the House of Commons. The results of today’s vote demonstrate clearly the confidence that Members of Parliament have in his ability to oversee the Lower Chamber in a manner that is thoughtful, respectful to all parties, and accountable to the people of Canada.  It is the Speaker's solemn duty to interpret parliamentary rules and traditions impartially, to maintain order in the House of Commons, and to defend the rights and privileges of Members, including the right to speak freely. I think that it is very important that we all work together to restore trust in the House of Commons – and all democratic institutions – that serve the needs of Canadians.  In the coming weeks, we will work hard on promoting greater openness and transparency across government.  We have already taken important steps towards this goal, including by making ministerial mandate letters public which set out expectations for the conduct of Ministers and their roles and responsibilities.  We will be undertaking further reforms in short order. I congratulate Geoff Regan again on his election to the position and look forward to working with him – and all Members of the House of Commons – during the 42nd Parliament to build a better Canada. This plan was developed by listening to Canadians.  It reflects their priorities, interests, and ambitions.   Canadians have told us they want a real and fair chance at success.  To provide real change, we will deliver a tax cut for the middle class, introduce a new Canada Child Benefit, and create jobs through new investments in public transit, as well as green and social infrastructure.  We will work with the provinces and territories to make post-secondary education more affordable, begin to develop a new Health Accord, and enhance the Canada Pension Plan. We will restore Canadians’ trust in their public institutions, including the House of Commons and the Senate, by working with greater openness and transparency.  This will include consulting on and implementing electoral reforms. Canadians want to live in a country where a clean environment and a strong economy go hand-in-hand.  We will fight climate change, with the provinces and territories, as Canada works to put a price on carbon and reduce carbon pollution.  We will also invest in clean technology and introduce new environmental assessment processes that seek and consider public input, with decisions informed by scientific advice. We will keep our diverse communities strong and will renew Canada’s nation-to-nation relationship with Indigenous peoples.  This will include launching an inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls, and working in collaboration so that every First Nations child receives a quality education. We will make it easier for new Canadians to build successful lives in Canada, reunite with their families, and contribute to the economic success of all citizens.  In response to pressing international need, we will welcome 25,000 new Canadians from Syria by the end of February 2016.  We will also provide more support for our veterans and their families, recognizing their service to our country.  Canadians want a safe and peaceful nation that provides them with opportunities.  We will strengthen our relationships with our allies and continue to work with them in the fight against terrorism, provide assistance to the world’s most vulnerable, contribute to greater peace throughout the world, invest in our Armed Forces, and negotiate trade agreements that expand our economic opportunities. We will undertake these and other initiatives while pursuing a responsible and transparent fiscal plan suited to challenging economic times. I have every confidence in this ambitious plan to bring real change to Canada.  We will deliver what Canadians have asked for, open up new horizons for our country, and show the world that diversity, creativity, and compassion are vital to a peaceful and prosperous future. This Sunday after sundown, friends and families will be gathering across our country to welcome the beginning of Hanukkah, the Jewish Festival of Lights. The lighting of the first candle of the menorah gives us pause to remember a story about the supremacy of hope over despair and the triumph of perseverance over oppression.  For people of the Jewish faith, this eight-day celebration inspires a rekindling of faith in miracles, and serves as a reminder to never forget about the power of even the smallest of lights in dark times. This celebration is an opportunity for us all to recognize the important contributions the Jewish community has made to our country’s cultural landscape over many generations. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating Hanukkah a happy, blessed, and peaceful holiday. Chag Chanukah Sameach!On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends and colleagues of former British Columbia Premier Bill Bennett. A savvy politician and businessman, the former Premier did a great deal to build the province of British Columbia and its reputation.  His many contributions to the province included Expo 86, the SkyTrain, the Coquihalla Highway and Canada Place. He received the Order of British Columbia in 2007 for his many accomplishments. He was a very capable and hard working British Columbian who contributed enormously to his province and to our country.  He will be remembered and honoured. Today,it is important for us to reflect on all of the women and girls, both here in Canada and abroad, for whom violence is a daily reality, and to mourn those who have died as a result. This day is held in remembrance of the 14 young women who were murdered on this date in 1989 at l'École Polytechnique de Montréal for no other reason than being women.  It is with a heavy heart that I join the families and friends of those promising young women here in Montréal today to mourn their tragic loss. This was a senseless act of violence that shocked the nation and remains, to this day, one of the darkest periods in Canadian history. Sadly on any given day in Canada, approximately 8,000 women and children are housed in shelters, largely for reasons of abuse.  That is why we need to raise awareness of this flagrant violation of basic human rights, help prevent it, and support the victims who have experienced it, both at home and around the world. One of the major initiatives I have committed to here at home is launching an inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls to recommend concrete actions to address and prevent violence against them.  We will also introduce legislation that will provide greater support for survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault. We all have an important role to play in stopping violence against women and girls, and in denouncing misogyny in all its forms.  Like all parents, I want my daughter to grow up in a safe community and a safe world.  I therefore urge all Canadians to make a commitment to stopping this degrading and dangerous behaviour. I am confident that by taking action and working together we can build a society that respects women and girls as equals and repudiates all forms of violence against them. There is no relationship more important to me – and to Canada – than the one with First Nations, the Métis Nation, and Inuit. It is time for a renewed, nation-to-nation relationship with First Nations peoples: one that is based on the understanding that the constitutionally-guaranteed rights of First Nations are a sacred obligation that we carry forward.  This obligation is based on respect, co-operation, and partnership; it is guided by the spirit and intent of the original treaty relationship; and it respects inherent rights, treaties and jurisdictions, and the decisions of our courts. Bringing about real change will take more than just individual people – or even individual governments.  What is needed is nothing less than a total renewal of the relationship between Canada and the First Nations peoples. I am also proud to say that, as promised, we have begun the process to create a national public inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls in Canada. A priority moving forward will be to make significant investments in First Nations education.  We will deliver increased funding for First Nations education and we will work on education reforms for First Nations children that are led by First Nations. We will lift the two per cent cap on funding for First Nations programs.  It is time for a new fiscal relationship with First Nations that gives these communities sufficient, predictable, and sustained funding. In partnership with Indigenous communities, the provinces, territories, and other vital partners, we will also fully implement the calls to action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, starting with the implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.   Finally, we will conduct a full review of the legislation unilaterally imposed on Indigenous peoples by earlier governments. Working together as partners, I am confident that we can make meaningful and immediate progress on the issues that matter most to First Nations communities. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I would like to congratulate Mr.  Brian Mulroney on being awarded the highest honour South Africa bestows upon foreign nationals: the Supreme Companion of Oliver Reginald Tambo award.  This prestigious award recognizes Mr.  Mulroney’s exceptional contribution to South Africa’s liberation movement and his steadfast support for the release of Nelson Mandela. Under the leadership of Mr.  Mulroney, the Government of Canada strongly opposed apartheid, a system of racial segregation in South Africa that was at the centre of political violence in the country for decades. Only four months after his release, Nelson Mandela travelled to Ottawa, Montréal and Toronto as a gesture of gratitude for Canada’s contribution.  In 1998, Mr.  Mandela became the first foreign leader to be awarded the Order of Canada.  He later became the first living person to be awarded honourary Canadian citizenship in 2001. In Canada, diverse perspectives and different opinions are celebrated, not silenced.  Canadians know that we are stronger not in spite of our differences, but because of them.  I am therefore very proud of the role Mr.  Mulroney and Canada played in bringing an end to apartheid and helping Mr.  Mandela’s fight for freedom. I extend our congratulations once again to Mr.  Mulroney on receiving this tremendous honour, and on showing the world that Canada champions pluralism and multiculturalism, both at home and abroad.  The theme of this year’s Human Rights Day – ‘Our Rights.  Our Freedoms.  Always. ’ – inspires us to reflect on the rights that form the foundation of freedom, justice, and peace in the world. Today, we pause to consider the importance of human rights.  We take this occasion to celebrate our very own John Humphrey who was instrumental in drafting the original Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by the United Nations 67 years ago today. With the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms as a guide, the Government will continue advocating against injustice and discrimination and safeguarding human rights and freedoms both here and abroad. We are fortunate to live in one of the most diverse countries in the world; a country that is strong not in spite of its diversity, but because of it.  On this day, I encourage all Canadians to reflect on the rights and freedoms that we enjoy in our great country.   Let us commit to upholding and promoting them every day in our homes, schools, and communities. On behalf of all Canadians, I am delighted to extend my congratulations to Dr.  Arthur B.  McDonald, Professor Emeritus at Queen's University, for being awarded the 2015 Nobel Prize in Physics.  Dr.  McDonald, who shares this honour with his colleague Takaaki Kajita of Japan, is being recognized for his key contributions to experiments which demonstrated that neutrinos have mass. This is a proud moment for Canadian science and for all Canadians. The Canadian government values the work of our country’s scientific community – and fully supports it – by encouraging excellence and respecting scientists’ independence.  We will ensure that all future decisions on matters that affect Canadians will be informed by scientific evidence. Once again, congratulations to Dr.  McDonald on this remarkable accomplishment.  I am certain it will inspire young Canadians to pursue careers in science and to push the boundaries of human knowledge. Today, we welcome many Syrian refugees who were forced to flee their homeland because of war and conflict.  Canada is doing the right thing by providing refuge for those so desperately seeking safety. This is a significant step in fulfilling our plan to bring 25,000 Syrian refugees to Canada in the coming months.  It also demonstrates our commitment to refugee resettlement, which is part of Canada’s proud humanitarian tradition. I know that, even for those facing extreme hardship, tragedy, and war in their country, leaving home is very difficult.  The transition to a new life in a new country can be a very daunting process. Let me reassure those coming to our country that our communities and all orders of government will work closely, together, to make it easier for you to adjust to these changes and become full participants in Canadian society.  While it might be much colder outside than back home, I am sure that you will find warm welcomes from your new neighbours. In the years to come, Canadians will look back with enormous pride on the contributions made by Syrian refugees and how they have made our country even better. The world gathered in Paris to fight climate change and its devastating impacts on our earth, our health, our economy, and our very way of life.  We also gathered with a common vision to leave a sustainable planet for our children and grand children. I am very pleased that Canada and 194 other countries were able to reach a historic, ambitious, and balanced agreement to fight climate change.  Together with our international partners, we agreed to strengthen the global response to limit global average temperature rise to well below 2 degrees Celsius as well as pursue efforts to limit the increase to 1. 5 degrees. Canadians can be proud of the strong and positive role we played during these very important international negotiations to address one of the biggest challenges of our generation.  There is much tough work that still needs to be accomplished both at home and around the world to implement the agreement. Here at home I will meet with the Premiers within the next 90 days to work on a plan to meet our international commitments in tackling climate change and transitioning to a low carbon economy.  Along with the provinces and territories, we will work with a wide array of stakeholders – and all Canadians – to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, including through carbon pricing.  We will move towards a climate resilient economy, and we will invest in public transit, green infrastructure and clean technologies to create new jobs and support our communities.  Internationally, we will provide significant support to help developing countries reduce their emissions and deal with the impacts of climate change.   Years from now, today may very well be the day our children look back to as the beginning of an ambitious global effort to finally fight climate change.  I am proud of the role Canada is playing in reaching this historic and balanced agreement, and I am confident that the world will rise to the challenge of addressing climate change. We will be asking Canadians to take an active part in this critical global effort using their remarkable ingenuity, innovation, and networks.  Let’s show the world what a positive forward-looking Canada can do and let’s work together with all countries to find the solutions the planet needs. Today, we celebrate the birthday of His Highness the Aga Khan, the spiritual leader of the Shia Ismaili Muslims, who has dedicated his life to the promotion of peace, pluralism, and compassion around the world. For over fifty years, the Aga Khan has been an inspiration to millions, working tirelessly to improve the health and education of those living in some of the world’s most vulnerable countries.  As a global humanitarian leader, he has worked with many partners – including Canada – to implement vital programs that advance long-term solutions to poverty, illiteracy, and disease. I have seen first-hand the Aga Khan’s commitment to the ideals of diversity and inclusion.  As a nation, we are proud His Highness was granted honourary Canadian citizenship for the leadership he has shown to advance development, pluralism, and tolerance – values that are at the core of our national identity. The world needs champions of diversity and compassion.  Today, we are delighted to thank our good friend, the Aga Khan, for all that he has done to help those in need, and wish him good health, happiness, and peace on this special day. The Indian residential school system, one of the darkest chapters in Canadian history, has had a profoundly lasting and damaging impact on Indigenous culture, heritage, and language.  As a father and a former teacher, I am overwhelmingly moved by these events. Seven years ago the Government of Canada apologized for this abhorrent system.  The apology is no less true, and no less timely, today.  The Government of Canada ‘sincerely apologizes and asks forgiveness of the Aboriginal peoples of this country for failing them so profoundly’. Today, on behalf of the Government of Canada, I have the honour of accepting the Commission’s Final Report.  It is my deepest hope that this report and its findings will help heal some of the pain caused by the Indian residential school system and begin to restore the trust lost so long ago. To the former Indian residential school students who came forward and shared your painful stories, I say: thank you for your extraordinary bravery and for your willingness to help Canadians understand what happened to you.  As the previous government expressed so eloquently in its formal apology: your courage ‘is a testament to [your] resilience as individuals and to the strength of [your] cultures. . . The burden of this experience has been on your shoulders for far too long.  The burden is properly ours as a government, and as a country’. Moving forward, one of our goals is to help lift this burden from your shoulders, from those of your families, and from your communities.  It is to accept fully our responsibilities – and our failings – as a government and as a nation. This is a time of real and positive change.  We know what is needed is a total renewal of the relationship between Canada and Indigenous peoples.  We have a plan to move towards a nation-to-nation relationship based on recognition, rights, respect, cooperation and partnership, and we are already making it happen. A national inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls is now underway.  Ministers are meeting with survivors, families, and loved ones to seek their input on how best to move forward.  We have also reiterated our commitments to make significant investments in First Nations education, and to lift the two per cent cap on funding for First Nations programs. And we will, in partnership with Indigenous communities, the provinces, territories, and other vital partners, fully implement the Calls to Action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, starting with the implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. We recognize that true reconciliation goes beyond the scope of the Commission’s recommendations.  I am therefore announcing that we will work with leaders of First Nations, Métis Nation, Inuit, provinces and territories, parties to the Indian Residential School Settlement Agreement, and other key partners, to design a national engagement strategy for developing and implementing a national reconciliation framework, informed by  the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s recommendations. The Government of Canada is committed to walking a path of partnership and friendship with Indigenous peoples.  Today’s Final Report marks a true milestone on that journey.  Again I thank the survivors, their families, and communities for this monumental achievement towards healing and reconciliation.  I also thank Commission Chair Justice Murray Sinclair, and Commissioners Chief Wilton Littlechild and Dr.  Marie Wilson who worked tirelessly to bring to light the truth about residential schools in Canada. Our overarching goal is to renew the relationship between Canada and Indigenous peoples.  This renewal must be a nation-to-nation relationship, based on recognition, respect for rights, co-operation, and partnership. The meeting here today with the Assembly of First Nations, the Congress of Aboriginal Peoples, the Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, the Métis National Council, and the Native Women’s Association of Canada is an important step towards realizing a renewed partnership. The views of these organizations are critical on how we engage on a number of the commitments we made to Indigenous peoples.  We will be seeking views on the way forward for: the national inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls; a national reconciliation framework informed by the Calls to Action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, starting with the implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples; and the funding and fiscal relationship required to close the gap in education and economic outcomes. A strong, healthy, cooperative relationship with the leaders of National Aboriginal Organizations is key to making change happen.  That is why I am committed to meeting annually with Indigenous leaders from across the country. I thank all the National Aboriginal Organizations leaders who joined with me today in a spirit of openness, collaboration, and hope to bring about positive change. On behalf of all Canadians, I congratulate Bob McLeod on once again being chosen by his peers to lead the government of the Northwest Territories. The people of the North and the strength of their communities are our country's best guarantee of Canadian sovereignty.  I look forward to working with Premier McLeod in a spirit of openness and collaboration to address the unique challenges and opportunities of the Northwest Territories.  Moving forward, some of our priorities will include addressing the high cost of living, improving health services, ensuring affordable housing, investing in climate change preparedness, and discussing additional means to support economic development, including through investment in infrastructure. I believe that confronting our collective challenges can only be achieved by sitting down together and engaging in open dialogue.  I look forward to meeting again with Premier McLeod, and working in partnership to make a positive difference in the lives of all Canadians in the Northwest Territories. Around the world and across Canada, Christians gather on Christmas to celebrate the birth of Jesus Christ.  This is a time when families, friends, and colleagues come together to celebrate the spirit of the season. Christmas is an opportunity for giving as well as receiving.  Whether it is volunteering time at a local food bank, buying gifts for children in need, or opening doors to someone who may be celebrating alone, the true spirit of Christmas is about connecting with our neighbours and our community. This year, Canadians are welcoming thousands of Syrian refugees to our country — people who have been forced to flee their homeland due to war and conflict.  I encourage all Canadians to show them a warm holiday welcome in keeping with our values of compassion, kindness, and generosity. From our family to yours, Sophie and I wish you all a most joyous holiday season and a merry Christmas. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I would like to offer our deepest sympathies to the family, friends, and colleagues of former Premier of Manitoba, Howard Pawley. Howard Pawley was a remarkable Canadian, widely respected for his championing of human rights, social justice, and economic development.  A lawyer by trade, Mr.  Pawley served as Premier of Manitoba from 1981 to 1988.  After politics, he joined academia, teaching political science and law at the University of Windsor, where he later served as Associate Professor Emeritus until his death. Today we mourn the loss of an exceptional visionary whose trail-blazing work made life better for the citizens of Manitoba and, by extension, for all Canadians.  His legacy will live on in the many advances our country has made toward achieving greater social justice for all. Thank you, my friends, thank you. Normally I’d start by thanking family and friends for putting up with my absences and allowing me to go off and campaign, but that’s not exactly right.  My decision to seek the leadership was never in spite of my responsibility to my family, but because of it.  And therefore family and friends were always at the very heart of this campaign.  We did this together. Thank you Sophie. Thank you Xavier et Ella-Grace. To my fellow candidates, Joyce, Martha, Karen, Deborah, Martin, David, George and Marc, and to the thousands of Canadians who worked on your campaigns, I want to say: we are not adversaries but allies.  Your courage, intelligence and commitment will continue to bring honour to the Liberal Party of Canada. And for the health of this party, the hard work he has done, I want to thank from the bottom of my heart, my friend, my colleague and a great Canadian Bob Rae.  Bob, we continue to need your leadership, your wisdom and your unparalleled commitment to the country and to our party. This has been a great campaign.  We are fiercely proud that it has been fueled by volunteers.  More than twelve thousand Canadians stepped up.  Thank you for your  dedication to making this wonderful country even better. Like every effective organization, this one has had principled, brilliant, and generous leadership.  Katie Telford and Gerald Butts.  My friends and compatriots.  Thank you for what you’ve done, for what you’re doing and for what we are going to do together.  Rob and Jodi, George, Aidan and Ava, thank you for sharing Gerry and Katie with us. My fellow Liberals, it is with great respect for those who have stood in this place before me, and great resolve to do the hard work required in front of us, that I accept, with humility, the confidence you have placed in me. Thank you.  All of you.  For your trust.  For your hope.  For choosing to be part of this movement we’re building.  And on this lovely spring evening in our nation’s capital, I am honored to stand with you, proud to be the Leader of the Liberal Party of Canada.  Je suis fier d’être le chef du Parti libéral du Canada. My friends, this is the last stop of this campaign.  But the first stop of the next one.  Over the past 6 months, I have been to hundreds of communities from coast to coast to coast.  I’ve met, talked with, and learned from thousands and thousands of Canadians. And because of your hard work, more than one hundred thousand voters have sent a clear message: Canadians want better leadership and a better government.  Canadians want to be led, not ruled.  They are tired of the negative, divisive politics ofMr.  Harper’s Conservatives.  And unimpressed that the NDP, under Mr.  Mulcair, have decided that if you can’t beat them, you might as well join them. We are fed up with leaders who pit Canadians against Canadians.  West against East, rich against poor, Quebec against the rest of the country, urban against rural. Canadians are looking to us, my friends.  They are giving us a chance, hopeful that the party of Wilfrid Laurier can rediscover its sunny ways. Hopeful that positive politics has a fighting chance against the steady barrage of negativity that you and I both know is coming soon to TV screens across Canada.  The phone messages, our volunteers tell us, have already started. To adapt a sentiment from the great American President Franklin D.  Roosevelt: never before in this country have the forces of negativity, cynicism and fear been so united in their hostility toward one candidate. The Conservative Party will now do what it does.  It will try to spread fear.  It will sow cynicism.  It will attempt to convince Canadians that we should be satisfied with what we have now. For at the heart of their unambitious agenda is the idea that “better” is just not possible. That to hope for something more from our politics and our leaders, more humanity, more transparency, more compassion, is naive and inevitably, will lead to disappointment. And they will promote that divisive and destructive idea with passionate intensity.  They will do so for a simple reason…They are afraid.  But… And I want to make this perfectly clear… My fellow Canadians, it is not my leadership that Mr.  Harper and his party fear. It’s yours. There is nothing that these Conservatives fear more than an engaged and informed Canadian citizen. My friends, if I have learned one thing in this life, it’s that our country is blessed with countless numbers of activist citizens, from all walks of life, and of all political views.  They have come out by the thousands over the course of this campaign. They’ve gathered by the hundreds in places like Ponoka Alberta and Oliver BC, Prince Albert Saskatchewan and Île-des-Chênes Manitoba.  Canadians who thought they were sending community leaders to be their voice in Ottawa, but instead got only Mr.  Harper’s voice back in their communities. We’ve seen their hopeful faces in crowds of Canadians gathered in Windsor and Whitby, Mississauga and Markham.  Middle class Canadians who are putting much into the economy and getting too little in return. We’ve seen hard-working Atlantic Canadians from Edmunston to Halifax, from Summerside to St John’s, who have decided that this is a government that does not share their values. To my friends in Labrador, I look forward to seeing you very soon. We’ve met young Aboriginal leaders from all across this country, from Tk’emlups to Whapmagoostui, who are simply tired of being forced to the margins of this country.  With the courage to walk 1600 kilometres through a Canadian winter to make the point that they will be Idle no More. Francophones who live in Shediac, Sudbury, St Boniface and all across this country who want their children to live and thrive in French, your determination inspires me, it must inspire the entire country. Quebecers, from Gatineau to Gaspé, who want to re-engage with this country.  With their country.  Who have no time for the divisive issues of their parents’ past, but want to work with Canadians who share their values to build a better country for all our kids. I want to take a moment to speak directly to my fellow Quebecers.  Your engagement and your support in recent months has been deeply moving.  I have learned so much from our conversations and our meetings I take nothing for granted.  I understand that trust can only be earned.  And my plan is to earn yours. I feel confident about the future.  I want to share with you why. Quebecers have always been builders.  From Champlain and Laurier to today, they have actively participated in shaping our country, together with so many other Canadians.  Our work is not complete.  We face enormous challengesHelping the middle-class make ends meet.  Reconciling economic growth and environmental stewardship.  Playing a positive and meaningful role in the world. To rise above these challenges we must demonstrate our audacity and ambition, my friends. Audacity and ambition, always. Lets be honest.  We will not convince everyone.  There will always be skeptics.  People who say that our country is too big and too full of differences to be effectively managed, or for everyone to be represented.  They are wrong my friends. I am not claiming that it will always be easy.  That there will not be any obstacles along the way.  That we will not have to make some compromises. Canada is a grand, yet unfinished project.  And it is up to us, together with all Canadians, to build the country that we want. The time has come for us to write a new chapter in the history of our country. Let’s leave to others the old quarrels and old debates that lead nowhere.  Let’s leave to others the ultra-partisan rhetoric and the old ways of doing politics.  Let’s leave the personal attacks to them. Quebecers, let us be, together, once again, builders of Canada. So that our country can match the height of the dreams and ambitions that are shared across this country.  So that we can leave our children a better world than the one that we inherited from our parents. My friends, the Liberal Party will regain the confidence of Canadians when it proves that it is here to serve them.  This is the task at hand.  This is what will guide me as Leader of the Liberal Party of Canada. To the new generation of Canadians and to all the young people who are not engaged by politics, I have a very simple message for you. Your country needs youIt needs your energy and your passionIt needs your idealism and your ideasThe movement we are have been building over the past 6 months, it is yours.  It belongs to you. It is the movement with which we will change politics. It is the movement that will allow us to reform our political institutions, to make reconciling the environment and our economy a real priority, and to play a positive and constructive role in the world. My fellow Liberals, Canadians are looking to us.  This campaign has been their campaign, more than just ours. They want something better.  They refuse to believe that better is not possible.  They see the country their parents and grandparents worked so hard to build, and want to hand an even better country to their children. Canadians share deep values that cannot be shaken, no matter how hard the Conservative Party may try.  Optimism.  Openness.  Compassion.  Service to community. Generosity of spirit. We want to believe that change can happen.  We want leadership that will shape our best instincts into an even better country. But Canadians will not suffer fools gladly.  Canadians turned away from us because we turned away from them.  Because Liberals became more focused on fighting with each other, than fighting for Canadians. Well, I don’t care if you thought my father was a great or arrogant.  It doesn’t matter to me if you were a Chretien-Liberal, a Turner-Liberal, a Martin-Liberal or any other kind of Liberal.  The era of hyphenated Liberals ends right here, tonight. From this day forward, we welcome all Liberals as Canadian Liberals.  United in our dedication to serve and lead Canadians. Unity not just for unity’s sake, but unity of purpose. I say this to the millions of middle-class Canadians, and the millions more who work hard every day to join the middle-class…Under my leadership, the purpose of the Liberal Party of Canada will be you.  I promise that I will begin, spend and end every day thinking about and working hard to solve your problems. I know that you are optimistic about us, but cautiously so.  You are, after all, Canadians.  You know that hope is a fine thing, but that without an equal measure of hard work to back it up, it will be fleeting. So I know that you will judge us by the tenacity of our work ethic, the integrity of our efforts, and, come 2015, the clarity of our plan to make our country better.  That is as it should be. I know how lucky I have been in my life.  Lucky, most of all, to have learned so much from so many Canadians.  To learn that, above all else in this country, leadership means service. I love this country, my friends, and I believe in it deeply.  It deserves better leadership than it has now. So let us be clear-eyed about what we have accomplished.  We have worked hard and we have had a great campaign.  We are united, hopeful and resolute in our purpose. But know this: we have won nothing more and nothing less than the opportunity to work even harder.  Work even harder to prove ourselves worthy of leading this great country. We should be deeply, deeply grateful for that opportunity.  As your leader, I fully intend to make sure we make the most of it. Change can happen.  Canadians want leadership that will work with them to make it happen. Be hopeful my fellow Liberals.  Work hard.  Stay focused on Canadians.  We can lead the change so many people want. A better Canada is always possible. Together, we will build it. Thank you. I stand before you a son of Quebec.  A grandson of British Columbia.  And a servant of Canada.  These Canadians you just met are a few of the thousands I’ve had the honour to meet, to talk with, and to learn from over the past 6 months.  Their stories are remarkable.   Remarkable, because they are so common in Canada.  With hope and hard work, every day Canadians live the values that unite this country.  Optimism, openness, compassion, service to community, generosity of spirit. My friends, our party must be their party. We must convince Chanchal that we share his work ethic, his desire to serve, his optimism about the future. We must prove to Penny that we are in it for her.  That we understand the burdens she carries, every day, to make life better for her kids, her neighbours, her community. We must build with Justine and Ali a country worthy of their dreams and show them that Canadians across our land already share the same values as Quebecers: integrity, openness and community engagement. To those who think that Canadians do not share common values, I encourage you to spend more time in this country.  All of this country. My fellow Liberals, my message to you is simple.  To lead Canada, we must serve Canadians.  And we must prove it with acts more than words.  I say that not as a son who learned it from his father, but as a father who every day learns that from his kids. The Conservatives have forgotten about the value of service.  The only time they talk about “community service” these days is when it’s a punishment for a crime.  And, anyway, the only person Mr Harper wants his caucus to serve is their leader. Well, that’s not good enough.  We need to be a party of community leaders, devoted to community service.  That’s why I am calling for open nominations for all Liberal candidates in every single riding in the next election. Mr Harper is showing us how governments grow out of touch.  Canadians are getting tired of the negative, divisive politics of the Conservatives.  And are disappointed that the NDP, with Mr Mulcair, has decided that if you can’t beat them, you might as well join them. Mr.  Mulcair and Mr.  Harper are masters of the politics of division.  They are content to exploit differences and disagreements to further their own interests. East against West, Quebec against the rest of Canada, the wealthy against the less fortunate, cities against regions, and so on. This is old politics.  But in the short-term, it can work.  It was how Mr.  Harper’s government was elected. We need to be better than that.  We are an optimistic, hard-working, problem-solving people.  Canadians want a positive alternative that brings new solutions, new ideas, and a new way of doing politics.  I’m more convinced than ever, that if we work hard every day between now and then, the Liberal Party of Canada will be that positive choice in 2015. So let me be perfectly clear on one point. I want to be your leader because I want work with you, and with millions of Canadians, to build that positive alternative to the Conservatives.  One that Canadians will choose freely because we will have earned their trust. Canadians don’t just want a different government.  They want a better government. Those who think we need to win at any cost – whatever the means – are mistaken.  It is a mistake to believe that just getting rid of this government will make all of Canada’s problems disappear. This is a naive and simplistic way to approach our future. We are facing real, and significant challenges. Middle class Canadians have seen their incomes stall, while their costs go up, and their debts explode.  Simply getting rid of Mr Harper will not get them their first real raise in 30 years. Young Canadians will not get jobs just because Mr Harper is gone. Quebecers will not automaticaly re-engage at the heart of our federation simply because Mr.  Harper is no longer Prime Minister. Our international reputation on the environment will not be restored the day after Mr.  Harper leaves. The truth is, Canadians want to vote for something, not just against somebody.  They want to vote for a long term vision that embodies our values, our dreams and our aspirations. They will not get that vision from a Frankenstein’s monster, at war with itself over fundamental issues like the Constitution, Natural Resources and Free Trade.  It would fail in its primary goal: it would extend, not end, Mr Harper’s career. From Ponoka Alberta, to Île-des-Chênes Manitoba to Edmunston New Brunswick, Canadians are hoping that we have learned that lesson.  Over the course of this campaign, I began to describe for Canadians a vision of this country that is very, very different from this government’s. Our highest economic objective will be prosperity for the middle class, and those Canadians who are working hard to join it.  Our grounding principle will be equality of opportunity.  Our agenda will develop our skills, support our vulnerable, attract investment, and expand trade. It is a vision that embraces diversity.  One that recognizes Canada is strong because of our differences, not in spite of them.  One that believes deeply in federalism, balancing national priorities with regional and local means of meeting them. A vision that sees newcomers to this country as community- and nation-builders; as citizens, not just employees, or a demographic to be mined for votes. Ours is a vision that knows economic prosperity and environmental health can -- and must -- go hand in hand in the 21st century.  We will not ignore science, or shy away from tough, urgent issues like carbon pricing.  Nor will we succumb to easy politics by demonizing one sector of the economy or region of the country. A Liberal Party led by me would never use western resources to buy eastern votes. We will stand for national unity by offering Quebecers and all Canadians a progressive political project that rallies us all.  We will be audacious and ambitious, because this country is greater than the sum of its parts. Our foreign policy will promote peace, democracy and development.  Canada must be a key player on the world stage, bringing forward positive debate and discussions – not divisive ones as is the case today. My fellow Liberals, make no mistake about it.  With me as your leader, you will get a clear, positive vision for Canada.  We’ve begun to lay it out in this campaign.  We’ve focused on the big issues like the prosperity of the middle class, a healthy democracy and sustainable economy. It’s a vision that you and I are going to finish, together, with Canadians. That is doing politics differently. If we work hard and stay optimistic, we will put forward an irresistible alternative to the Conservatives 30 months from now.  Irresistible not because it is Liberal, but because it will be 100%, undeniably Canadian. It won’t be easy.  Nothing worth doing ever is.  But that is the path to victory in 2015. Hope, my friends, yes.  Always hope.  But more than that.  Hope and hard work. You see, the biggest problem with Mr Harper’s government is not that they’re mean-spirited.  It’s that they’re unambitious. After all, what is the Conservatives’ economic message these days? That Canadians should be happy we don’t live in Europe?What’s worse, the Conservatives use our challenges as opportunities to demonize their opponents and divide Canadians, not to find solutions. It is up to us, the Liberal Party, to say that the Conservative way of doing politics is not good enough.  Canadians are better than their politics, Canada deserves far better. Now, there are those who ask me: what makes you think you can take this on?To them, I say this: I have lived and breathed every square kilometre of this country from the day I was born.  I’ve lived and worked in the east and the west, in French and in English.  I am proud to have lifelong friends, colleagues and supporters from the Arctic archipelago to Point Pelee. And I have met, talked with, and learned from more Canadians in the past six months than Mr Harper has in the past six years. I have been open to Canadians my entire life.  And because of that, I have a strong sense of this country.  Where it has been, where it is, and where Canadians want it to go. And what is it with Conservative attacks on teachers? They’ve never met a teacher they wouldn’t pick a fight with.  I am fiercely proud to be one of the hundreds of thousands of Canadians who belong to the teaching profession.  And let me tell you this, my friends, this teacher fully intends to fight back. In closing, I want to share a story with you. Many of you know that today marks an anniversary.  Exactly forty-five years ago tonight, a gathering of Canadians made my father Leader of the Liberal Party of Canada. Many Canadians have approached me over the course of this campaign to share stories about my dad.  So let me tell you a special one. I met Constable Jeff Ling at Loyalist College in Belleville.  It was at the end of a long morning.  Constable Ling came up to the front of the room to give me a gift.  I recognized it instantly.  It was a picture of dad and me.  You’ve probably seen it.  I was about 2 years old and dad was hurrying up to Rideau Hall, with me tucked roughly under his arm. Both Dad and I are looking at an RCMP officer.  He’s dressed in full uniform and saluting us crisply. That picture means as much to Jeff as it does to me.  Because that officer was his father. What moved me was that here Jeff was, serving his country a generation later, with the same dedication and quiet pride as his father.  In that moment, he evoked the thousands of Canadians I had the unique honour of growing up with.  Men and women for whom service to Canada was its own reward. I know there are those who say this movement we’re building is all about nostalgia.  That it’s not really about me, or you, or Canada.  Let’s face it: they say that it’s about my father. Well, to them I say this. . . It is.  It is about my Dad.  And Constable Ling’s dad.  And our mothers.  And yours.  It's about all of our parents and the legacy they left us.  The country they built for us.  Canada. But we know now what they knew then.  It’s more about the future than the past.  It is always, in every instance, about our children more than our parents’ legacy. That with hope and hard work, we can make progress happen.  That we can leave a better country to our kids than we inherited from our parents. Progress.  That is the core value of the Liberal Party.  That is why generations of Canadians, from every corner of our land, and every walk of life, poured their heart and their soul and their ideas and their sweat into our Party. I said back in October that the Liberal Party didn’t create Canada.  Canada created the Liberal Party.  Well, the last six months have taught me that maybe, just maybe, Canadians are willing to do that again.  We can lead the change that so many Canadians want to make happen.  I’m asking you for your time, for your smarts, for your hope, and your hard work.  And this week, I’m asking for your vote to become the next leader of the Liberal Party of Canada.  Join me, join us, and our work will make us proud.  Believe, now and always, in our country.  Thank you. I have had the great privilege over the past several months to travel our vast and beautiful country. Whether in Nelson, B.C., Brandon, Man., Mississauga, Montmagny, Que., or Sydney, N.S., it has been a thrilling and enlightening experience to engage with Canadians from all walks of life. Since this summer, I’ve travelled to more than 60 cities, towns and villages, listening to the concerns of teachers, truck drivers, farmers and small business owners. Everywhere I go I’m hearing a yearning for something new, something better. Canadians asked for open and honest government; instead they have been saddled with secrecy, cynicism and rampant ethical scandals. Canadians wanted a focus on families, jobs and security; instead they have suffered through political gamesmanship and gimmicks. And in the midst of all this, the Harper Conservatives have neglected the most pressing issue facing the country – the fact that middle class Canadians have not had a decent raise in 30 years. Governments of all political stripes have been elected and re-elected on economic platforms which prioritized openness to trade, fiscal discipline, tax competitiveness, and investment in skills, research and infrastructure. Middle-class Canadians were convinced to support this agenda because they were promised that this growth would create prosperity – for them. Unfortunately, that simply has not happened. The only thing middle-class Canadians have seen grow at a level approaching GDP is household debt. For wealthier Canadians, an urgent conclusion must be drawn: if we fail to solve this problem, Canadians’ anxiety will grow, and eventually, they will stop supporting a growth agenda. Consequently, we will all be worse off. The stake is equal or greater for those Canadians who struggle with lower incomes. Central to the ideal of progress is the promise that upward mobility is a realistic possibility for all. Yet Canadians now feel they are more likely to fall out of the middle class into poverty than vice-versa. And let’s be clear – this is more than just an economic problem. As middle class Canadians grow more anxious, it becomes harder and harder to solve every other problem we face as a nation. This includes issues that stem from a key principle upon which this country was founded – equality of opportunity. Millions of Canadians share in the belief that in a fair society, their hard work should result in a decent standard of living and better prospects ahead for themselves and their families. Our seniors have worked extremely hard over the years, and we must ensure that they receive the support they have worked for and deserve. Healthcare, home care, pensions: these items, in particular, must be protected and reinforced. Likewise, we have a responsibility to do more to support our young people. This means tackling youth unemployment rates – which are twice as high as the national average – and protecting young workers from exploitation via illegal unpaid internships. It also means guaranteeing Canadians access to affordable, high quality, lifelong education, a crucial policy goal because of its importance to creating a strong middle class. This is why, as Parliament returns this week, I am recommitting to stay focused on the priorities of hardworking Canadians. The Prime Minister may prefer to focus on the politics of the day and on making personal attacks against me, but I will remain focused on Canadians; on finding solutions for families who are looking to get ahead, provide for their children and loved ones; on enhancing and championing the prospects of middle class Canadians, seniors and youth; on raising the bar on openness and accountability; and on fighting for an inclusive, united Canada where our diversity is held up as a strength and never a weakness. The people whose common values bind this country together have been left out long enough. It is time we had political leadership in this country that is devoted to changing this. That is my commitment to Canadians: At an early age I learned just how optimistic, compassionate and hardworking the people who live across this extraordinary land truly are. I trust you. And I intend to spend each and every day working hard to earn your trust.  
=======
Mr. Speaker –

One of the greatest choices a person can make in their life is the choice to serve their fellow citizens. Maybe it’s in government, in the military, or in a police force. In whatever capacity one serves, dedicating your life to making Canada – and indeed, the world – a better place is a calling of the highest order.

Now imagine, if you will, being told that the very country you would willingly lay down your life to defend doesn’t want you. Doesn’t accept you. Sees you as defective. Sees you as a threat to our national security.

Not because you can’t do the job, or because you lack patriotism or courage – no, because of who you are as a person, and because of who your sexual partners are.

Now imagine, Mr. Speaker, being subjected to laws, policies, and hiring practices that label you as different – as “less than”.

Imagine having to fight for the basic rights that your peers enjoy, over and over again.

And imagine being criminalized for being who you are.

This is the truth for many of the Canadians present in the Gallery today, and those listening across the country.

This is the devastating story of people who were branded criminals by the government. People who lost their livelihoods, and in some cases, their lives.

These aren’t distant practices of Governments long forgotten. This happened systematically, in Canada, with a timeline more recent than any of us would like to admit.

Mr. Speaker, today we acknowledge an often-overlooked part of Canada’s history. Today, we finally talk about Canada’s role in the systemic oppression, criminalization, and violence against the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and two-spirit communities.

And it is my hope that in talking about these injustices, vowing to never repeat them, and acting to right these wrongs, we can begin to heal.

Since arriving on these shores, settlers to this land brought with them foreign standards of right and wrong – of acceptable and unacceptable behaviour. Suitable and unsuitable partnerships.

They brought rigid gender norms – norms that manifested in homophobia and transphobia. Norms that saw the near-destruction of Indigenous LGBTQ and two-spirit identities. People who were once revered for their identities found themselves shamed for who they were. They were rejected and left vulnerable to violence.

And discrimination against LGBTQ2 communities was quickly codified in criminal offences like “buggery”, “gross indecency”, and bawdy house provisions.

Bathhouses were raided, people were entrapped by police.

Our laws bolstered and emboldened those who wanted to attack non-conforming sexual desire.

Our laws made private and consensual sex between same-sex partners a criminal offence, leading to the unjust arrest, conviction, and imprisonment of Canadians. This criminalization would have lasting impacts for things like employment, volunteering, and travel.

Those arrested and charged were purposefully and vindictively shamed. Their names appeared in newspapers in order to humiliate them, and their families.

Lives were destroyed. And tragically, lives were lost.

And this didn’t end in 1969 with the partial decriminalization of homosexual sex. Up until 1988, a twenty year old gay man who had sex with another man could still be convicted of a crime.

But the imprisonment and criminalization of LGBTQ2 individuals wasn’t the end of it. Other methods of oppression have been rampant throughout our society for generations.

Homophobia during the time of the AIDS crisis generated hysteria and propagated fear of gay men.

Books and magazines were stopped at the border under the guise of obscenity offences and customs regulations – the content of words and images deemed unacceptable.

And LGBTQ2 families have had to fight their own government for the right to benefits, and the freedom to marry, often at great personal cost.

Over our history, laws and policies enacted by the government led to the legitimization of much more than inequality – they legitimized hatred and violence, and brought shame to those targeted.

While we may view modern Canada as a forward-thinking, progressive nation, we can’t forget our past: The state orchestrated a culture of stigma and fear around LGBTQ2 communities. And in doing so, destroyed people’s lives.

Mr. Speaker, a Purge that lasted decades will forever remain a tragic act of discrimination suffered by Canadian citizens at the hands of their own government.

From the 1950s to the early 1990s, the Government of Canada exercised its authority in a cruel and unjust manner, undertaking a campaign of oppression against members, and suspected members, of the LGBTQ2 communities.

The goal was to identify these workers throughout the public service, including the foreign service, the military, and the RCMP, and persecute them.

You see, the thinking of the day was that all non-heterosexual Canadians would automatically be at an increased risk of blackmail by our adversaries due to what was called “character weakness”.

This thinking was prejudiced and flawed. And sadly, what resulted was nothing short of a witch-hunt.

The public service, the military, and the RCMP spied on their own people, inside and outside of the workplaces. Canadians were monitored for anything that could be construed as homosexual behaviour, with community groups, bars, parks, and even people’s homes constantly under watch.

During this time, the federal government even dedicated funding to an absurd device known as the Fruit Machine – a failed technology that was supposed to measure homosexual attraction. This project was funded with the intention of using it against Canadians.

When the government felt that enough evidence had accumulated, some suspects were taken to secret locations in the dark of night to be interrogated.

They were asked invasive questions about their relationships and sexual preferences. Hooked up to polygraph machines, these law-abiding public servants had the most intimate details of their lives cut open.

Women and men were abused by their superiors, and asked demeaning, probing questions about their sex lives. Some were sexually assaulted.

Those who admitted they were gay were fired, discharged, or intimidated into resignation. They lost dignity, lost careers, and had their dreams – and indeed, their lives – shattered.

Many were blackmailed to report their peers, forced to turn against their friends and colleagues.

Some swore they would end their relationships if they could keep their jobs. Pushed deeper into the closet, they lost partners, friends, and dignity.

Those who did not lose their jobs were demoted, had security clearances revoked, and were passed over for promotions.

Under the harsh glare of the spotlight, people were forced to make an impossible choice between career and identity.

The very thing Canadian officials feared – blackmail of LGBTQ2 employees – was happening. But it wasn’t at the hands of our adversaries; it was at the hands of our own government.

Mr. Speaker, the number one job of any government is to keep its citizens safe. And on this, we have failed LGBTQ2 people, time and time again.

It is with shame and sorrow and deep regret for the things we have done that I stand here today and say: We were wrong. We apologize. I am sorry. We are sorry.

For state-sponsored, systemic oppression and rejection, we are sorry.

For suppressing two-spirit Indigenous values and beliefs, we are sorry.

For abusing the power of the law, and making criminals of citizens, we are sorry.

For government censorship, and constant attempts to undermine your community-building;

For denying you equality, and forcing you to constantly fight for this equality, often at great cost;

For forcing you to live closeted lives, for rendering you invisible, and for making you feel ashamed –

We are deeply sorry. We were so very wrong.

To all the LGBTQ2 people across this country who we have harmed in countless ways, we are sorry.

To those who were left broken by a prejudiced system;

And to those who took their own lives – we failed you.

For stripping you of your dignity;

For robbing you of your potential;

For treating you like you were dangerous, indecent, and flawed;

We are sorry.

To the victims of The Purge, who were surveilled, interrogated, and abused;

Who were forced to turn on their friends and colleagues;

Who lost wages, lost health, and lost loved ones;

We betrayed you. And we are so sorry.

To those who were fired, to those who resigned, and to those who stayed at a great personal and professional cost;

To those who wanted to serve, but never got the chance to because of who you are – you should have been permitted to serve your country, and you were stripped of that option.

We are sorry. We were wrong.

Indeed, all Canadians missed out on the important contributions you could have made to our society.

You were not bad soldiers, sailors, airmen and women. You were not predators. And you were not criminals.

You served your country with integrity, and veterans you are.

You are professionals. You are patriots. And above all, you are innocent. And for all your suffering, you deserve justice, and you deserve peace.

It is our collective shame that you were so mistreated. And it is our collective shame that this apology took so long – many who suffered are no longer alive to hear these words. And for that, we are truly sorry.

To the loved ones of those who suffered;

To the partners, families, and friends of the people we harmed;

For upending your lives, and for causing you such irreparable pain and grief – we are sorry.

And as we apologize for our painful mistakes, we must also say thank you to those who spoke up.

To those who pushed back when it was unpopular, and even dangerous, to do so. People from across the country, from all walks of life, and of all political stripes. We stand here today in awe of your courage, and we thank you.

We also thank members of the We Demand an Apology Network, our LGBTQ2 Apology Advisory Council, the Just Society Committee for Egale, as well as the individuals who have long advocated for this overdue apology.

Through them, we’ve understood that we can’t simply paint over this part of our history. To erase this dark chapter would be a disservice to the community, and to all Canadians.

We will work with the academic community and stakeholders to ensure that this history is known and publically accessible.

We must remember, and we will remember. We will honour and memorialize the legacy of those who fought before us in the face of unbearable hatred and danger.

Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that we will look back on today as a turning point. But there is still much work to do.

Discrimination against LGBTQ2 communities is not a moment in time, but an ongoing, centuries-old campaign.

We want to be a partner and ally to LGBTQ2 Canadians in the years going forward. There are still real struggles facing these communities, including for those who are intersex, queer people of colour, and others who suffer from intersectional discrimination.

Transgender Canadians are subjected to discrimination, violence, and aggression at alarming rates. In fact, trans people didn’t even have explicit protection under federal human rights legislation until this year.

Mental health issues and suicides are higher among LGBTQ2 youth as a result of discrimination and harassment, and the homelessness rates among these young people is staggering.

And there is still work to do on blood and organ donation, and the over criminalization of HIV non-disclosure. The Government needs to continue working with our partners to improve policies and programs.

But there are important and significant changes coming – the repeal of section 159 of the Criminal Code is working its way through the House.

And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that earlier today in this House we tabled the Expungement of Historically Unjust Convictions Act. This will mean that Canadians previously convicted of consensual sexual activity with same-sex partners will have their criminal records permanently destroyed.

Further, I am pleased to announce that over the course of the weekend, we reached an Agreement-in-Principle with those involved in the class action lawsuit for actions related to “The Purge”.

Never again will our government be the source of so much pain for members of the LGBTQ2 communities.

We promise to consult and work with individuals and communities to right these wrongs and begin to rebuild trust. We will ensure that there are systems in place so that these kinds of hateful practices are a thing of the past. Discrimination and oppression of LGBTQ2 Canadians will not be tolerated anymore.

With dialogue and with understanding, we will move forward together. But we can’t do it alone.

The changing of hearts and minds is a collective effort. We need to work together, across jurisdictions, with Indigenous peoples and LGBTQ2 communities, to make the crucial progress that LGBTQ2 Canadians deserve.

Mr. Speaker, Canada’s history is far from perfect.

But we believe in acknowledging and righting past wrongs so that we can learn from them.

For all our differences, for all our diversity, we can find love and support in our common humanity.

We’re Canadians, and we want the very best for each other, regardless of our sexual orientation, or our gender identity and expression. We will support one another in our fight for equality.

And Canada will stand tall on the international stage as we proudly advocate for equal rights for LGBTQ2 communities around the world.

To the kids who are listening at home and who fear rejection because of their sexual orientation or their gender identity and expression;

And to those who are nervous and scared, but also excited at what their future might hold;

We are all worthy of love, and deserving of respect.

And whether you discover your truth at 6 or 16 or 60, who you are is valid.

To members of the LGBTQ2 communities, young and old, here in Canada and around the world:

You are loved. And we support you.

Canada gets a little bit stronger every day that we choose to embrace, and to celebrate, who we are in all our uniqueness. We are a diverse nation, and we are enriched by the lives, experiences, and contributions of people who are gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, queer, and two-spirit.

To the trailblazers who have lived and struggled, and to those who have fought so hard to get us to this place: thank you for your courage, and thank you for lending your voices. I hope you look back on all you have done with pride.

It is because of your courage that we’re here today, together, and reminding ourselves that we can, and must, do better.

For the oppression of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and two-spirit communities, we apologize. On behalf of the government, Parliament, and the people of Canada: We were wrong. We are sorry. And we will never let this happen again.

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

Good afternoon.

Mr. President, fellow delegates, friends.

Before I begin, I would like to offer Canada’s condolences, in the light of Tuesday’s earthquake in Mexico, to all families and friends in mourning.

We wish a speedy recovery for all those who have been injured, and thank all first responders for their tireless efforts to help keep people safe.

Our thoughts are also with our friends in the Caribbean who continue to suffer from devastating hurricanes.

The generosity and resilience that millions have shown in the face of these natural disasters is an inspiration to the world, and Canada stands ready to lend a helping hand in whatever way it can.

It is an honour to be back here with you today, and to have an opportunity to speak to this year’s theme: “Focusing on people: striving for peace and a decent life for all on a sustainable planet.”

People. Peace. A good quality of life, and caring for our environment.

Fairness for people no matter where they live.

These things that matter deeply to Canadians.

We have, throughout our history, worked hard to secure them.

At home and around the world.

I’d like to share with you today some of the difficult lessons that Canada has learned along the way.

Canada is not a wonderland, free of the challenges you face.

We face many of the same challenges that you do.

Canada remains a work in progress.

So I want to tell you about the Canadian experience because for all the mistakes we’ve made, we remain hopeful.

Hopeful that we can do better, and be better, and treat each other with the dignity and the respect that is the birthright of every human being.

I want to tell you our story because I know that the challenges we have faced – and continue to face – are not unique in the world.

And neither are the solutions.

An approach that values human dignity – that emphasizes fairness and real opportunity for everyone – has a home in Canada and in every country.

It’s an approach that doesn’t just serve domestic needs, but that makes the world a better, more peaceful, more prosperous place for all.

This year, in 2017, Canada celebrated the 150th anniversary of Confederation. Our 150th birthday, if you will.

But Canada is much older than that.

It has been home to the descendants of settlers and immigrants for hundreds of years, and Indigenous Peoples for millennia.

We are a country built on different cultures, different religions, different languages all coming together.

That diversity has become our great strength.

But that is not and has not always been true for everyone who shares our land.

Canada is built on the ancestral land of Indigenous Peoples – but regrettably, it’s also a country that came into being without the meaningful participation of those who were there first.

And even where treaties had been formed to provide a foundation for proper relations, they have not been fully honoured or implemented.

For First Nations, Metis Nation and Inuit peoples in Canada, those early colonial relationships were not about strength through diversity, or a celebration of our differences.

For Indigenous Peoples in Canada, the experience was mostly one of humiliation, neglect, and abuse.

Of a government that didn’t respect their traditions and strengths, or their distinct governments and laws, but instead denied and undermined their rights and their dignity.

That sought to overwrite their distinct histories, to eradicate their distinct languages and cultures, and to impose colonial traditions and ways of life.

That discarded the Indigenous imperative to protect the land and water, of always thinking seven generations ahead.

In doing so, we rejected the very notion that whole generations of Indigenous Peoples have the right to define for themselves what a decent life might be.

And we robbed Canada of the contributions these generations would have made to growing our great country.

The failure of successive Canadian governments to respect the rights of Indigenous Peoples in Canada is our great shame.

And for many Indigenous Peoples, this lack of respect for their rights persists to this day.

There are, today, children living on reserve in Canada who cannot safely drink, or bathe in, or even play in the water that comes out of their taps.

There are Indigenous parents who say goodnight to their children, and have to cross their fingers in the hopes that their kids won’t run away, or take their own lives in the night.

Young Indigenous people in Canada struggle to get a good education.

And though residential schools are thankfully a thing of the past, too many Indigenous youth are still sent away, far from their families, just to get the basic education most Canadians take for granted.

And for far too many Indigenous women, life in Canada includes threats of violence so frequent and severe that Amnesty International has called it “a human rights crisis.”

That is the legacy of colonialism in Canada.

Of a paternalistic Indian Act.

Of the forced relocation of Inuit and First Nations communities, and a systematic denial of Métis rights and history.

Of residential schools that separated children as young as five years old from their families, punished them for speaking their own language, and sought to extinguish Indigenous cultures entirely.

The good news is that Canadians get it. They see the inequities. They’re fed up with the excuses.

And that impatience gives us a rare and precious opportunity to act.

We now have before us an opportunity to deliver true, meaningful and lasting reconciliation between Canada and First Nations, the Métis Nation, and Inuit peoples.

And as we embark upon that process of reconciliation, we are guided by the minimum standards adopted here, in this chamber, ten years ago this month.

I know that Canada has a complicated history with the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

We actively campaigned and voted against it, then endorsed it in the most half-hearted way possible, calling it an “aspirational document.”

The Declaration is not an aspirational document. It means much more than that to the Indigenous Peoples and others who worked so hard, for so long, to bring the Declaration to life.

In the words of Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the Declaration provides “the necessary principles, norms, and standards for reconciliation to flourish in twenty-first-century Canada.”

That’s not an aspiration. That’s a way forward.


Last year, at the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Canada’s then Minister of Indigenous and Northern Affairs finally corrected Canada’s position on the Declaration, and announced that we are now a full supporter of the Declaration, without qualification.

In partnership with Indigenous Peoples, we’re moving ahead with a thorough review of federal laws, policies, and operational practices, to get our house in order.

To make sure that our government is meeting its obligations, including international obligations under the Declaration.

We know that the world expects Canada to strictly adhere to international human rights standards – including the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples – and that is what we expect of ourselves, too.

We are working closely with Indigenous Peoples in Canada to better respond to their priorities, to better understand how they see and define self-determination, and to support their work of nation rebuilding.

Along with Indigenous partners, we are co-developing programs to ensure the preservation, protection and revitalization of Métis, Inuit and First Nations languages.

In short, we have been working hard, in partnership with other orders of government, and with lndigenous leaders in Canada, to correct past injustices and bring about a better quality of life for Indigenous Peoples in Canada.

I’ll give you a few examples.

Many will sound familiar to you, because they are closely aligned with the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals – goals that apply to all of our countries, without exception.

Our efforts include investments to help bring safe and clean drinking water to all Indigenous communities – part of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goal #6: clean water and sanitation.

So far, more than two dozen long-term drinking water advisories in Indigenous communities have been eliminated, and we have a plan to bring to an end those that remain.

Our efforts also include new investments to close the gap in First Nations education, and new education agreements that recognize the power and authority of First Nations communities.

And these agreements recognize First Nations’ authority to develop and control education systems – systems run in communities, by communities, and for communities.

These are all important steps toward SDG #4: quality education.

Beyond that, for many Indigenous Peoples in Canada, these investments will lay the groundwork for progress on SDG #8: decent work and economic growth.

We know that no one can have a real and fair chance at success without the things that make success possible: good health; strong communities; good, well-paying jobs; a quality education, and safe and affordable places to live.

Clearly, that includes Indigenous Peoples, too.

That’s why our efforts include working with Indigenous communities to help build and refurbish homes.

Construction work on nearly 4,000 homes has been completed or is underway, helping to fulfill SDG #11: making communities safe and sustainable places to live.

And across the country, we are also working on a National Housing Strategy, to give more Canadians access to housing that is safe, adequate, and affordable.

Our efforts also include a stronger focus – in Indigenous communities, across Canada, and around the world – on SDG #5: combatting gender-based violence and giving women and girls equal opportunities to succeed.

We need women and girls to succeed because that’s how we grow stronger economies, and build stronger communities.

That is why our government will be moving forward shortly with legislation to ensure equal pay for work of equal value.

You see, the Sustainable Development Goals are as meaningful in Canada as they are everywhere else in the world, and we are committed to implementing them at home while we also work with our international partners to achieve them around the world.

This is important, because poverty and hunger know no borders. We cannot pretend that these solvable challenges happen only on distant shores.

The need for greater equality and decent work – those are real and persistent human needs. Ones we cannot afford to ignore, especially in our own countries.

We are challenged, every one of us, to provide better opportunities for all people, including Indigenous Peoples.

We are challenged by the fact that true equality is unconditional.

Equality applies to every person. No matter their gender, or where they were born, or how they worship, or whom they choose to love.

And the need to better care for the environment we all share … well, as I said here at the signing ceremony for the Paris Agreement, “in every possible sense, we are all in this together.”

We are all in this together, and the relationships we build need to reflect this reality.

In Canada, this means new relationships between the government of Canada and Indigenous Peoples – relationships based on recognition of rights, respect, co-operation and partnership.

Recently, we made changes to our own government structures, to help with the transition to these new relationships with Indigenous Peoples.

We are dismantling the old colonial bureaucratic structures and creating a new Department of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs, led by Dr. Carolyn Bennett, an experienced and effective advocate for Indigenous Peoples in Canada.

In her new role, she will lead our government’s efforts to better support Indigenous Peoples as they strengthen their distinct political, cultural, legal and economic institutions, and assume autonomy over their own affairs, including the recognition and implementation of self-government as an expression of self-determination.

At the same time, we recognize that in Canada, the federal government has a historic responsibility for providing services to Indigenous Peoples, and an ongoing role to play.

To better do this work – while at the same time supporting Indigenous self-determination – we will create, in consultation with Indigenous Peoples, a new Department of Indigenous Services, led by our former Minister of Health, Dr. Jane Philpott.

Over time, programs and services will increasingly be delivered by Indigenous Peoples, as part of their move toward true self-government, and the full implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

We believe that this division is the best way for Canada to meet more of its SDG obligations at home, while advancing the principle of self-determination that is at the heart of the Declaration.

There is no blueprint for this kind of change.

There is no road map we can follow.

But neither can we wait.

The time has come to forge new paths together.

To move beyond the limitations of old and outdated colonial structures, and to create in their place something new, something that respects the inherent right of Indigenous Peoples to self-govern, and to determine their own future.

For the federal government, this means making changes to how we operate. The departmental change I mentioned is part of fulfilling that responsibility.

For Indigenous Peoples, it means taking a hard look at how they define and govern themselves as nations and governments, and how they seek to relate to other orders of government.

Indigenous Peoples will decide how they wish to represent and organize themselves.

Some may choose to engage with our government based on historic nations and treaties, others will use different shared experiences as the basis for coming together.

The choice is theirs. This is precisely what self-determination demands.

Though this path is uncharted, I am confident that we will reach a place of reconciliation.

That we will get to a place as a country where nation-to-nation, government-to-government, and Inuit-Crown relationships can be transformed.

A place where the standards enshrined in the UN Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples are fully realized – not merely by government mandate, but in true partnership with Indigenous Peoples.

Part of that new partnership will involve addressing the shared challenge of climate change.

Indigenous and northern communities are particularly affected by its stark reality.

In communities across the north – places like Paulatuk, Kugluktuk, and Tuktoyaktuk – where community members are finding sea ice conditions more dangerous and unpredictable for travelling and hunting in the winter.

In Canada’s western Arctic, the permafrost is melting and huge pieces of tundra are eroding into the ocean.

And around Baffin Island, Inuit elders are finding it difficult to forecast the weather like they used to. So difficult that many are now reluctant even to try.

At home, we are working hard to help these communities adapt and prepare for the future.

At the international level, our commitment is unwavering.

There is no country on this planet that can walk away from the reality of climate change.

And for our part, Canada will continue to fight for the global plan that has a realistic chance of countering it.

We have a responsibility to future generations, and we will uphold it.

We have a chance to build in Canada – and in fact, all around the world – economies that are clean, that are growing, that are forward-looking. We will not let that opportunity pass us by.

In Canada, that means putting a price on carbon pollution. Done well, it’s the most effective way to reduce emissions while continuing to grow the economy.

It also means continuing to work with other countries in support of our shared goals.

Last week, we welcomed environmental leaders from more than 30 countries to a working session in Montréal, where we talked about how to advance the Paris Agreement and continue the global shift toward a more sustainable future for all people.

Likewise, the global community has a responsibility to do all that it can to reduce inequality within and among countries.

In Canada, we are working hard to achieve this goal.

We improved child benefit payments. Our new program gives nine out of ten families more money to help with the high cost of raising their kids, and because of that, we expect to reduce child poverty in Canada by 40%.

We raised taxes on the wealthiest one percent so that we could lower them for the middle class, and we’re continuing to look for ways to make our tax system more fair.

Right now we have a system that encourages wealthy Canadians to use private corporations to pay a lower tax rate than middle class Canadians.

That’s not fair, and we’re going to fix it.

We’re investing to help make education more affordable and more accessible, so that every Canadian can get the training they need to find and keep a good, well-paying job.

This is especially important at a time when automation is challenging traditional ideas of work.

Internationally, we have reaffirmed Canada’s commitment to reducing poverty and inequality, putting gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls at the heart of our development efforts.

We took this approach because we know that when we empower women and girls, economic growth follows.

Peace and cooperation takes root.

And a better quality of life for families and communities is possible.

We are also working hard to deliver progressive trade agreements like the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement with the European Union, which comes into effect today.

CETA will expand opportunities for businesses; create good, well-paying jobs for workers; and deliver meaningful economic growth – the kind of growth that benefits all our citizens, not just the wealthiest.

We have the opportunity – and I would argue we have the responsibility – to ensure that trade agreements include strong provisions to safeguard workers’ rights, to protect the environment, and to ensure that the benefits of trade are felt more broadly.

Because when we do that, we don’t just grow our economies – we live up to our values.

And we say to ourselves and to each other that good enough… just isn’t good enough. That better is always possible.

And better is always possible when we put people at the heart of the decisions we make.

A focus on people – as the theme for this General Debate reminds us – is the best way to build a peaceful and prosperous future.

It’s a future we all want – for ourselves, and our children, and our grandchildren.

It’s a future that Indigenous Peoples in Canada, and around the world, deserve to share in – as full and equal partners.

And it’s a future we can build, if we work together.

Our efforts to build a better relationship with Indigenous Peoples in Canada are not only about righting historical wrongs.

They are about listening, and learning, and working together. They are also about concrete action for the future.

The reconciliation we seek has lessons for us all.

We can’t build strong relationships if we refuse to have conversations.

We can’t chart a more peaceful path if the starting point is suspicion and mistrust.

And we can’t build a better world unless we work together, respect our differences, protect the vulnerable, and stand up for the things that matter most.

As I said last year, we know it will be hard work.

But I remain confident – for Canada’s experience shows this to be true – that any challenge can be met if we meet it together.

Thank you.

Thank you all for being here today.

Last week I had the honour of meeting with Her Majesty The Queen, in Scotland.

It was a particularly poignant visit, taking place as it did during both the 150th anniversary of Confederation, and the 65th year of Her Majesty’s service as Canada’s Head of State.

It was a meeting that gave us an opportunity to talk about our shared history and a chance to reflect on what the coming years might look like.

We know that later this year, the steady and trusted leadership of The Queen’s current representative in Canada, His Excellency the Right Honourable David Johnston, will come to an end.

After seven years of service marked by hard work, grace, and humility, His Excellency will be retiring this fall.

When his appointment was first announced back in 2010, Prime Minister Stephen Harper said that the Governor General “represents the best of Canada.”

That was true then, and it is true now.

We will always be grateful for the contributions the Governor General and Mrs. Johnston have made in service to our country, and we wish them all the best in the years ahead.

Which brings us to today’s announcement.

I am very pleased to announce that, on my recommendation, Her Majesty The Queen has graciously approved the appointment of Ms. Julie Payette as the next Governor General of Canada.

Already well known to Canadians, Ms. Payette has made her mark as an accomplished scientist, jet pilot, athlete, public policy scholar, musician, and science and technology advocate.

She is undoubtedly best known for her ground-breaking work as a leader in Canada’s space program.

Ms. Payette served as an astronaut with the Canadian Space Agency for more than a decade.

She was Canada’s Chief Astronaut from 2000 to 2007, and the second Canadian woman to enter space.

And, in 2009, she proudly represented all Canadians during our first visit to the International Space Station.

Many of you probably remember watching as Ms. Payette and seven other prominent Canadians carried the Olympic Flag during the opening ceremonies in Vancouver in 2010.

Ms. Payette’s life has been one dedicated to discovery, to dreaming big, and to always staying focused on the things that matter most.

These truly Canadian traits, along with her years of public service, make her unquestionably qualified for this high office.

I know she will be an excellent Governor General and I am looking forward to her installation ceremony this fall, when she will formally become Canada’s 29th Governor General since Confederation.

It is my privilege to now introduce Canada’s Governor General Designate: Ms. Julie Payette.

Hello everyone! Happy Canada Day!

What a crowd!

You know, I’m pretty confident that we’re breaking records here on Parliament Hill. And we should be, because today, together, we’recelebrating Canada 150!

I’d like to acknowledge that we are on the ancestral lands of the Algonquin people.

And I want to start with a thank you. To the hundreds of thousands here on the Hill and across our nation’s capital, thank you for being here.

And to the millions more, in your homes across the country, maybe watching through the screen door while trying not to burn the hot dog buns on the barbecue; or chilling with friends and neighbours in the local park, festooned in red and white, thank you for joining us, and for celebrating with us today.

And to our expat friends and family, gathered in far-off places like the Maple Leaf Pub in London or the Big Bite in Hong Kong, thanks for joining us, we love you and miss you right back! And I have no idea what time it is where you are, but cheers!

And of course, I’d also like to thank Their Royal Highnesses, The Prince of Wales and The Duchess of Cornwall for being with us today to mark this tremendous celebration.

150 years since Confederation.

A nice, round number that’s as good a reason as any to celebrate. To throw a massive party and invite the friends and neighbours. To reflect on our past, to cheer on today, and to recommit ourselves to the future. But let’s not kid ourselves: this isn't really our 150th birthday.

We’re much older than that: Canada, and the idea of Canada, goes much further back than just 150 years. For thousands of years, in this place, people have met, traded, built, loved, lost, fought, grieved. They built strong communities, worked hard to build better lives for their kids, and learned to lean on their neighbours to get through our long cold winter nights, to thrive in the daunting landscapes that stretch across Turtle Island.

For centuries, families have chosen to build their lives in Canada, in many cases embarking on great journeys in search of a better future. And because of the support of those who were already here, it was possible to achieve individual success and build strong communities.

So of course, Canada is a lot older than 150 years. But, let’s be honest, Canada is young as well.

You see, many people will tell you that our nation was only truly born a hundred years ago, when for the first time Canadians of all backgrounds were joined, to fight and die and win together at a faraway place called Vimy Ridge.

The valour we defined that day would echo through names like Dieppe, Juno, Kandahar, and so many others.

But we took our place on the world stage, too, through constructive engagement: from the crisis in the Suez to the floor of the UN. By welcoming the world to come see who we are, as we figured out for ourselves with Expos 67 and 86. With Olympic Games in Montreal, in Calgary, in Vancouver.

But if we’re going to talk sports, maybe we became a nation with the Summit Series, in ’72, where ‘we all squeezed the stick and we all pulled the trigger.’

Or was it in ’65, when we chose our beloved Maple Leaf flag?

Maybe it didn't really happen until we brought home the Constitution, and defined ourselves through the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, a mere 35 years ago.

So really, I guess 150 years is as good a date as any, because it lets us really celebrate all of that, and more, today.

In 1867, Confederation became a reality thanks to the compromise and vision of people like John A. Macdonald and George-Étienne Carter.

What began as a partnership between four provinces became something much greater; a country that is extraordinary, prosperous and generous. A land of possibility.

Canada has been blessed with leaders of all stripes who recognized how special this place is. Leaders who believed in the Canadian dream, who built railways and highways and seaways to connect us to each other, and to the world. These projects became the backbone of Canada; infrastructure worthy of a great nation.

But the story of Canada should not be confined to grand acts of nation building. The story of Canada is really the story of ordinary people doing extraordinary things.

The valour of Francis Pegahmagabow. The courage of Viola Desmond. The leadership of Thérèse Casgrain. The tenacity of Terry Fox.

It’s in these people that the true story of Canada is told. Their triumphs are unique, but the values that underpin them are Canadian values.

William Lyon Mackenzie King once said that citizenship is public service “in one form or another”. He was right. Being a citizen of Canada goes hand in hand with serving Canada. With believing in something bigger than ourselves, and giving back of our time in support of it.

Because this country has given us so much to be grateful for.

Millions of people from around the world have chosen Canada as their home. Millions more were born into such luck.

Many of us grew up here. We made childhood friends here, we fell in love here, raised our kids here. My friends, the one of the greatest gifts we’ve ever been given is the gift of Canadian citizenship.

Louis St. Laurent referred to Canada as a place where people joined their talents without merging their identities. And it’s true.

Canada is a country made strong not in spite of our differences but because of them. We don’t aspire to be a melting pot – indeed, we know true strength and resilience flows through Canadian diversity.

Ours is a land of original peoples and of newcomers. And our greatest pride is that you can come here from anywhere in the world, build a good life, and be part of our community. We don’t care where you’re from or what religion you practice or whom you love. You are all welcome in Canada.

But let’s not forget that if Canada is a truly multicultural and open place today, it’s not by chance.

Indeed, the very unity of our country 150 years ago hinged on the acceptance of multiple languages and cultures.

It hinged on the peaceful coexistence – and active cooperation – between people who were different from one another.

Over time, the bilingual character of our country became a central and definitive part of our identity – and an official policy.

We speak French and English, with hundreds more languages spoken from coast to coast to coast.

And so, diversity has been at the very core of Canada for centuries. It’s the foundation on which our country was built.

We may be of every colour and creed, from every corner of the world...

We may live in British Columbia. Yukon. Alberta. The Northwest Territories. Saskatchewan. Manitoba. Nunavut. Ontario. Quebec. New Brunswick. Prince Edward Island. Nova Scotia. Or Newfoundland and Labrador.

But we embrace that diversity, while knowing in our hearts that we are all Canadians, and that we share a common pride in that red and white flag.

Yet, as we trace our history, we know that our record is far from perfect.

We know that, while many of us celebrate Canada 150, others do not.

Indigenous Peoples in this country have faced oppression for centuries – since early explorers believed they had found a new world.

As a society, we must acknowledge and apologize for past wrongs, and chart a path forward – one that promises a bright future for all Canadians.

We’ve got a long way to go to make things right with Indigenous Peoples in Canada. But we have begun that journey, together.

Canada 150 gives us reason to reflect, not only on our success, but also on our remaining challenges. And in doing so, we vow to set a new course for the next 150 years – one in which a nation-to-nation, Inuit-to-Crown, and government-to-government relationship with Indigenous Peoples is a top priority.

This is what we have to remember: We can achieve reconciliation. But in order to get there, we must educate ourselves, dedicate our efforts to progress, and work very, very hard to see it through, over the coming years and decades.

It is a choice we make, not because of what we did, or were, but because of who we are.

Let us be known the world over for our integrity, for our compassion, and for our never-ending desire to be better, so we can do better.

That’s the Canadian way.

Whether it was building a railway through the Rockies or a quantum computer, Canadians know that better is always possible.

As we know, the success of Canada did not happen by accident, and it won’t continue without effort.

Our job now is to advance equal opportunity to ensure that each and every Canadian has a real and fair chance at success.

We must create the right conditions so that the middle class, and those working hard to join it, can build a good life for themselves and their families.

And we have to work together to combat climate change, one of the greatest crises facing our planet. It’s up to us to leave our kids and grandkids with a better future – through a present in which protecting our environment is an obligation, not an option.

And we can do it. I know we can.

My friends, many of you have come here from great distances.

So take a second. Look around. And really take in this moment. You are all a part of history.

150 years? Nah. Look at us: Canada is being born today.

And thanks to all of you, will be again tomorrow.

You know, when we set out into the world, many of us do so with a maple leaf sewn onto our backpacks. But all of us already have that maple leaf graven onto our souls. It’s a subtle, quiet pride in knowing that we are blessed to be citizens of Canada, the best country on Earth.

So be proud of our accomplishments.

Be proud of our country.

For this is Canada.

And this is home.

Consider:

The price they paid.

The burden they bore.

The country they made.  

Seven thousand and four Canadians were wounded in the battle that began here, 100 years ago today. Three thousand, five hundred and ninety-eight Canadians died.

This, from a population, in 1917, of just eight million.

Think of it, for a moment. The enormity of the price they paid.

These were, for the most part, young men in their late teens and early twenties. Not professional soldiers. But they were superbly trained. And supported by months of painstaking preparation.   

Yet for all that, they still required courage – to a degree that is hard to fathom.  

They weren’t impervious to fear, these men. They were human. Homesick, tired, footsore and cold.  

Yet still, they advanced. Uphill, through mud. Under fire. They advanced, fighting like lions, moving just behind a devastating allied artillery barrage.

And they did not stop. They did not stop, until they had victory.

There were strategic objectives. Vimy is high ground. It had been transformed into a fortress.

But if you read the accounts of the men who fought here, you’ll find they focused on other things.  

They wrote to loved ones. They thanked them for parcels and letters. They asked about brothers and sisters. And they wrote about their fellow soldiers – those who’d fallen. Those still fighting.

Typical Canadians, they talked about the weather.

“The sun has been shining a couple times this last week,” reads a letter from William Henry Bell, dated April 7th, 1917. “The sun is a kind of stranger here. Say, that cake you sent was sure fine.”

William Bell died at Vimy, April 10th, 1917. He was twenty.

The burden, they bore.  

And, the country they made.

Because this, too, is why we’re here. Why we remember.

For in their ultimate sacrifice, these ordinary, yet extraordinary, men of the British dominion fought for the first time as the people of one country. Francophone, Anglophone. New Canadians. Indigenous Peoples. Side by side, united here at Vimy in the four divisions of the Canadian Corps.  

It is by their sacrifice that Canada became an independent signatory to the Treaty of Versailles.

In that sense, Canada was born here.

The sculpture of Canada Bereft is an emblem of a nation’s grief. It’s an emblem of loving care – which evokes also the thousands of Canadian women who bravely answered the call, serving as nurses, or who provided critical support at home.

But this monument is also symbolic of Canada’s birth – and our enduring commitment to peace. As I see the faces gathered here – veterans, caregivers, so many young people – I can’t help but feel a torch is being passed. One hundred years later, we must say this, together. And we must believe it: Never again.

Friends and honoured guests, let us hold to the grace of William Henry Bell. To the grace of the ones who stood by their friends, through unimaginable hardship. Through death itself.

And who, in that offering, stood by their country. And made their country, in its beginnings.

They were Canadians. They were valiant, beyond measure.

Honour them. 

Good evening.

Thank you Dan, for the kind introduction. And thank you all for being here. To the many policy makers and industry leaders here today, thank you.

And, of course, to the organizers of CERAWeek – thank you so much for this award. It truly is an honour – for me personally, for Canada’s superb natural resources minister, Jim Carr, who is here today, and for the government of Canada.

I’d like to begin with a little family history, if I may.

You may have heard that my father, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, was also Prime Minister of Canada, back in the seventies and early eighties. In 1980, I was in my prime Star Wars years. Nine or so. Politics was not the first thing on my mind.

But that year, my dad’s government introduced a policy called the NEP. The National Energy Program. It lasted until 1985. And it didn’t work. It was a failure. It didn’t mean to be. But it ended up being the wrong policy at the wrong time.

Now, I’m not being disloyal when I say this. It’s just a historical fact. The NEP introduced a level of state control over energy that hurt growth and jobs. It became hugely controversial.

Consequently, when I began my run for leadership in 2012, 30 years later, the Trudeau name was mud in Alberta, still. A Trudeau, it was said, could not get elected dog catcher in Alberta.

But here’s the thing. I understood – we understood – that there is no path to prosperity in Canada that does not include a thriving, vibrant energy sector – both traditional, and renewable. We understood that our resource industries provide thousands of well-paying, middle-class jobs – not just in Alberta, but across Canada and around the world. And, by the way, here in Texas, too.

The Enbridge-Spectra merger, which creates one of the largest energy infrastructure companies on this continent, is only the most recent example of an extraordinarily productive partnership. Last year alone, Texas trade with Canada was worth $35.1-billion US dollars. Texas exports to Canada were worth nearly $20-billion US dollars. Imports from Canada, $15-billion US dollars. That translates into thousands of good, Texan jobs, my friends. By our reckoning, about 460,000. Not bad.  

The ties between our two countries are economic – and also strategic. This is the most successful economic relationship in the world, supporting millions of middle class jobs on both sides of the border. Canada buys more from America than does any other country. We are the number one customer of two thirds of U.S. states – and in the top three for 48 states.  

Nothing is more essential to the U .S. economy than access to a secure, reliable source of energy. Canada is that source. We have the third largest oil reserves in the world, and provide more than 40 per cent of America’s imported crude. And this extends beyond oil: we supply you with more electricity and uranium than any other country, too.

My point is just this: Canadians, cold-weather dwellers that we are, “get” the importance of energy. So, immediately upon launching my leadership campaign, I went to Calgary. I think quite a few people, including quite a few in my own party, thought I was crazy.

But, guess what?  A little over four years later, with a handful of Trudeau Liberals elected across Alberta, we’re on our way  to getting three new pipeline projects under way, which will help connect Canada’s oil patch with energy markets around the world.

The first, Kinder Morgan’s Trans Mountain line, will run from Alberta, across the Rockies to the Pacific. The second, TransCanada’s Keystone XL pipeline, recently approved by President Trump, will ship Canadian crude to refineries here in Texas. And there’s Enbridge’s Line 3 replacement, that also goes south. These ambitious projects will go a long way towards ensuring North American energy security – for years to come.

I make no bones about it: we’re proud of this. It’s progress. It’s important. As I said on that first trip to the oil patch back in 2012: no country would find 173 billion barrels of oil and just leave it in the ground. The resource will be developed. Our job is to ensure this is done responsibly, safely and sustainably.

Which brings me to the second piece, equally critical: while developing our resources, for the economic benefit of Canadians, we must also look to the future.

There will come a day, far off but inevitable at some point, when traditional energy sources will no longer be needed. In preparing for that day, we have two critical responsibilities. One is to sustain the planet between now and then, so that we can pass this treasure on to our children – better than we found it. The second is to get ahead of the curve on innovation.

And we in Canada are doing that. Canadian companies are leaders in developing technologies such as carbon capture, next-generation biofuels, advanced batteries for electric cars and cleaner oil-sands extraction processes, among other advances. This creates good jobs. It also helps the planet.

Here’s the crux of it: in Canada, as I said, we know all about preparing for winter and the long, cold nights. When we go camping – and we love to camp, that’s one stereotype that is totally accurate, by the way – we light our campfires before the sun goes down. That doesn’t make us anti-daylight.

It’s a bit the same with energy. Innovating – and pursuing renewables – isn’t somehow in competition with more traditional resources. It’s common sense. It’s wise preparation for the future. Our children and their children deserve no less.

All of which brings me full circle: we would not be on this path – not even close – had we not insisted that environmental protection and resource development go hand in hand. 

In the 21st Century, Canadians will not accept that we have to choose between a healthy planet and a strong economy. People want both. And they can have both. It takes compromise. It takes hard work. But it is possible.

The proof is that, a bit more than a year into our first (hopefully not our last) term of government, we have made progress on pipelines, as I mentioned, but also on a national carbon-reduction plan – which finally puts a price on carbon pollution. This was hammered out in cooperation with our provinces, equivalent to American states. It is a first step and more work needs to be done. But it is a first for our country, after years of false starts.

We could not have moved on pipelines had we not acted on climate. We could not have acted on climate had we not paid due deference to jobs, which is another way of saying, to the needs of the Canadian people – especially the middle class, and those working hard to join it.

And so this is why, my friends, I am so very pleased and honoured to receive this award. We are showing that environmental leadership and economic growth are inseparable. They are one. We are proud of the start we’ve made. And we hope it will become a model elsewhere.

Thank you.

Good evening, everyone. Thank you all for the warm welcome.

It is an honour to be here.  It’s truly a privilege just to be invited to the St. Matthew’s Day Banquet, and an even greater privilege to be one of your keynotes this evening.

I’d like to start by thanking Mayor Scholz for his gracious invitation. And to speak after Foreign Minister Gabriel is no small feat, but I’ll do my modest, Canadian best.

You know, whenmy office received the mayor’s invitation to this historic dinner, there was no question that I would attend.

Of course, this banquet’s repution precedes itself, as much for the great meal as for the mangnificent room. And I knew I had to be here because of the friendship between our two countries.

We have long been partners on the world stage.

Canadians and Germans value democracy and the rule of law. We understand the importance of international cooperation and partnership. And we share a progressive vision of the world, realizing the immense potential that comes with embracing change.

I talk a lot about how our goal as a government is to help the middle class and those working hard to join it. That, ultimately, was the vision for change that elected us. Regular Canadians were worried about their future, and we made a promise to support them through these uncertain times.

But that worry – that anxiety – isn’t unique to Canada. It’s everywhere.

Too many people around the world are anxious about what the future may hold.

And who could blame them?

With the pace of globalization and technological change, there is a very real fear out there that our kids will be worse off than we are. That they won’t have the same kind of opportunities that we have, despite being generally much more educated, and infinitely more tech-savvy.

Citizens across the political spectrum are looking for guidance. They’re looking for leadership. They’re looking for a voice.

And so far, they’re feeling a little let down.

When companies post record profits on the backs of workers consistently refused full-time work – and the job security that comes with it – people get defeated.

And when governments serve special interests  instead of the citizens interests who elected them – people lose faith.

Increasing inequality has made citizens distrust their governments. Distrust their employers.

It turns into “Us” vs. “Them”.

And we’re watching that anxiety transform into anger on an almost daily basis.

It follows that people’s natural defence mechanism is to hunker down and recoil inward. To give into cynicism. To retreat from one another.

But it’s time for us, as leaders in politics and business, to step up. It’s time to get real about the challenges facing the middle class, and those working hard to join it. Whether your goal is to build a successful company, or lead a respected and effective government, it’s time to realize that the old approaches don’t work anymore.

We can’t go about things the same way and expect to succeed in this new world.

People are looking for leadership. It’s up to each of us to determine what kind of leadership they find.

People don’t need leaders to tell them they have problems.

People need leaders to help them build solutions together.

I want to use this speech to challenge us. To highlight that the challenges we’re facing require real action and real leadership. And I’m choosing to do it here in Germany because I know you get that. On values, on approach, on inclusive success you’re on the right track and inspiring others to follow.

But we all need to do more.

For business leaders, it’s about thinking beyond your short term responsibility to your shareholders. You have an equally important responsibility to your workers, their families, and the communities that support you.

It’s time to pay a living wage. To pay your taxes. And give your workers the benefits – and peace of mind – that come with stable, full-time contracts.

You can’t build loyalty into corporate culture when people feel overworked and undervalued. You must give your workers avenues to update and modernize their skills for a changing world.

You must be part of the communities where you operate, realizing that these towns and cities support you, and you must, in turn, support them.

And when you hear that an employee is expecting a child, congratulate her, don’t make her question whether or not she’ll have a job to come back to.

And you must ensure your workplace, and especially your boardrooms, reflect the full diversity of society.

It’s time to take a broader view of employee-employer relationships. One that treats workers as partners in success.

Now, I fully appreciate the irony of preaching about the struggles of the middle class to a sea of tuxedoes and ball gowns, while wearing a bow-tie myself.

But this discussion needs to happen. We need to realize our collective responsibility – to the people who elected us. To the people who put their faith and trust in us.

The answers are not in this room. They’re out there. We all need to leave this place, and truly listen to people who are anxious about their futures.

Hear first-hand about their concerns, work with them to develop solutions, and actually implement them.

The hard work of change begins with each and every one of us – around our boardrooms, our water coolers, and our Parliaments.

As for Parliaments, let me tell you a little bit about what we’ve done in ours, in Canada.

We know that we are far from perfect, but what success we’ve had didn’t happen by accident and won’t continue without effort. So what I’ve done over the past years is listen to people talk about their worries. About the fact that the rising tide no longer seems to lift all boats.

In Canada, we’ve taken some steps to help allay that anxiety. To help people deal with the uncertainty of a changing world.

For example, we raised taxes on the wealthiest one per cent, so we could cut taxes for the middle class.

We improved child benefit payments into one single, monthly, tax free Canada Child Benefit. This initiative has given 9 out of 10 families more money to help with the high costs of raising their kids. Because of that, we’re on track to reduce child poverty by around 40 per cent in our country.

We’re increasing the amount of assistance Canadian students can get, helping to make post-secondary education more affordable.

And we’re investing in a range of training and employment programs for unemployed and underemployed Canadian workers, allowing them to upgrade their skills so they’re ready for the modern workforce.

These are just a handful of the things we’ve done to help people adapt to and absorb the changes we’re all feeling.

We could not have done this without listening to Canadians.

In fact, I’ve spent the last month and a half back at home on a cross-Canada tour. Over the past few weeks, I’ve done about a dozen town halls, filling arenas and community centres, and took questions for hours. On anything and everything. Nothing scripted, nothing staged. Just heard directly from middle class Canadians about the things they were worried about. And, more importantly, I heard what they needed from my government to help.

Now, for the politicians in the room, it probably sounds like a high risk proposition to answer a host of questions for hours on end. It was unpredictable and, at times, very intense. But it’s only in having those tough conversations that we can get at the heart of what matters.

To everyone here, I leave you with this. Better is always possible. But we have to make better happen.

We’re not going to get it right everyday.

But Canadians and Germans need to continue to lead by example.

Whether you’re a business or a government, it’s time to realize that this anger and anxiety we see washing over the world is coming from a very real place. And it’s not going away.

We can no longer brush aside the concerns of our workers and our citizens. We have to address the root cause of their worries, and get real about how the changing economy is impacting peoples’ lives.

Ladies and gentlemen, we can all play a role in making the transition to the new economy a smooth one. And it starts with listening.

Let’s be better, because we know we can do better.

For our citizens, for our workers, and for the entire world.

Thank you.

Introduction

President Tusk, President Tajani, distinguished Parliamentarians, ladies and gentlemen.

Good morning. It is a privilege to be here today. I’m told that this marks the first address to the EU Parliament by a sitting Canadian Prime Minister, so thank you for allowing me this honour.

As you know, I was in Brussels not too long ago to formally sign the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, and the Strategic Partnership Agreement.

Alongside President Tusk, President Juncker, and Prime Minister Fico, we took an important step towards deepening our relationship and expanding free and progressive trade between Canada and the European Union.

And yesterday, we took another huge step.

One that was decades in the making.

Canada-EU relationship and shared values

This year, we celebrate 41 years since the diplomatic mission of the European Commission was established in Ottawa.

And over the course of our historic partnership, Canada and the EU have stood side-by-side on the things that matter.

Things like maintaining global security.

Advancing the values of peace and justice.

And ensuring our peoples’ prosperity through trade and investment.

We’ve worked together on issues like climate change, and the rights of women and girls around the world.

And, ladies and gentlemen, I am confident that we will achieve tremendous things together in the years to come – for the countries we represent, and, most importantly, for the people we serve.

The European Union is a truly remarkable achievement, and an unprecedented model for peaceful cooperation. Canada knows that an effective European voice on the global stage isn’t just preferable – it’s essential.

We know that the EU is the world’s largest donor of development and humanitarian assistance, and that, together, your member states represent one of the world’s largest economies. Not only that, but you are a vital, central player in addressing the challenges that we collectively face as an international community. 

Indeed, the whole world benefits from a strong EU.

On behalf of Canadians, thank you for your continued, respectful engagement with our country. Indeed, the Canada-EU relationship has become an exemplary demonstration of international collaboration.

I’d like to thank Canada’s current Ambassador to the EU, Dan Costello, for his excellent service to our country. Dan has been tremendous in his ongoing support to our new Ambassador, the Honourable Stéphane Dion.

Stéphane, a close friend and mentor, is a man who has long fought to create a better country for all Canadians. He will proudly represent Canada with courage and conviction in this next important chapter.

Now, let me re-iterate what a tremendous honour it is for me to represent Canada in this historic chamber today. Coming to Strasbourg, and addressing you, was an important priority for me because I understand and appreciate the nature of what we have here.

I believe that the relationship between Canada and the EU is so resilient because it is centered on an important bedrock of common values. Values that shape and define us. Values that Canadians and Europeans share.

You see, collectively, we believe in democracy, transparency, and the rule of law. We believe in the recognition and respect of human rights. And we believe in inclusion, and embracing diversity.

We know that, in an increasingly connected world, we must choose to lead the international economy, not simply be subjected to its whims.

And we know that the state has an important role to play – not only in supporting its people, but also in helping to create the right conditions for progress.

And to this last point, as we have just demonstrated to the world, we, collectively, value trade, and the promise of prosperity for all our citizens that comes with it.

CETA

Yesterday – in addition to ratifying the Strategic Partnership Agreement – this Parliament voted to ratify the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement.

After years of negotiations, this important trade agreement is finally crossing the finish line. And I think we can all agree – CETA was an enormously ambitious undertaking, and will prove to be one of our greatest successes.

I’d like to express my deepest gratitude to Canada’s former Minister of International Trade – now Minister of Foreign Affairs – Chrystia Freeland; our Chief Negotiator, Steve Verheul; and their EU counterparts for their tireless efforts in getting this deal done.

And I’m confident that our new Minister of International Trade, François-Philippe Champagne, will be a strong voice for Canada on the world stage over the coming years.

Now, let’s be clear – a deal as ambitious as CETA takes a lot of hard work. Every one of us in this room knows that this wasn’t easy. It took a lot of back of forth. It took extended discussions and negotiations. Meetings in Canada, and meetings across Europe.

But the finished product is something we can all be incredibly proud of. I believe that CETA will become the blueprint for future trade deals of this magnitude and complexity.

And that’s pretty amazing.

The motto of the European Union, “United in Diversity”, is a great reminder of what can be accomplished when, despite our differences, countries come together for the mutual benefit of our people.

Now, we live in a time when some people are worried that the current system only benefits society’s narrow elite. And their concern is valid.

This anxiety towards the economy and trade – the worry that our kids won’t have access to the same jobs and opportunities that we have – can be addressed only if we ensure that trade is inclusive, and that everyone benefits. 

And this agreement – the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement – is a terrific example of just that.

Because, at its heart, CETA is a framework for trade that works for everyone.

This agreement will result in the creation of good, well-paying jobs for middle class workers. It will put food on the table for families, and help grow and strengthen our communities.

Now, let’s say you’re a budding entrepreneur with an innovative product or idea. Maybe you’re having a tough time getting access to new customers. Well, CETA has just opened the door to new markets.

And what if you’re a consumer looking to buy imported goods, but the cross-border costs are too high? Maybe you’ve had your eye on Manitobah Mukluks, a Canadian, Indigenous-founded company whose products are currently subject to a 17 percent tariff in Europe. Well, with the ratification of CETA, those tariffs are removed, and you, as a consumer, are paying less at the check out.

Trade that is free and fair means less hold up and less red tape at our borders for international transactions.

It means that manufacturers can expand their products’ global reach, gaining market share and really competing with the best in the world.

And it means that folks working in service sectors like engineering, architecture, and information technology will see greater predictability and transparency when dealing with international clients.

At the end of the day, both Canada and the EU want to do what is best for our people.

We want hardworking folks to make a good living and support their families. We want moms and dads to be able to give their kids the opportunities that they never had. We want each generation of Canadians and Europeans to be better off, and have a higher standard of living, than the one that preceded it.

And deals like CETA – which is centered on the idea of trade that is both free and fair – will get us there.

At the end of the day, by making it easier to buy and sell products, we can expand opportunities for our businesses – both back in Canada and right across the EU. We can create jobs for the middle class, and make sure that the benefits of trade reach our citizens.

Make no mistake: This isn’t just about trade, in terms of imports and exports, dollars-in and dollars-out. It’s about making people’s lives better. CETA is a comprehensive blueprint for responsible economic cooperation between countries.

This modern, forward-looking agreement reflects a truly progressive trade agenda – one that protects the ability of societies to promote the public good. For example, within CETA there are provisions for labour protection.

For responsible investment practices.

For food and consumer safety.

For forest, fishery, and aquaculture management.

And for strong environmental stewardship.

My friends, this really is one of the most sustainable, progressive trade agreements in the world. And with it, Canada and the European Union have made history.

To all members present – thank you for your hard work over the last several years in making this ambitious goal a reality. I know that all our citizens will be better served for it.

Conclusion

Canada and the European Union have been friends, partners, and allies for a very long time. And our natural, easy relationship is grounded in what we have in common.

We share goals and aspirations for a better, safer, and fairer world.

We want to do right by the workers and families we were elected to represent.

And we embrace change, seeking the opportunity to lead in a global economy that’s constantly evolving.

CETA and the SPA – these landmark agreements – are a direct reflection of those commonalities. And it will serve to benefit Canadians and Europeans alike for generations to come.

In the things we have so far agreed upon, and in the discussions that lie ahead, the Canada-EU strategic partnership will forever be rooted in respect, and with an eye to the future.

My friends and dear colleagues, it’s safe to say that this is just the beginning. For Canada and the European Union, the best is yet to come.

Thank you very much.

Mr. Speaker –

It was with shock and sadness that Canadians heard about a despicable act of terror last night in Quebec City.

By current counts, six people worshipping at the Quebec City Islamic Cultural Centre have lost their lives, with many others seriously injured.

This was a group of innocents targeted for practicing their faith. Make no mistake – this was a terrorist attack.

It was an attack on our most intrinsic and cherished values as Canadians – values of openness, diversity, and freedom of religion.

Our hearts go out to the families of the victims. These people were just that – people. Ordinary Canadians. They were brothers, uncles, fathers, and friends. These were people of faith, and of community.

And in the blink of an eye, they were robbed of their lives in an act of brutal violence.

I know that, already, there’s a deeply personal connection here, in this very House. The Member of Parliament for Louis-Hebert knew this community and has joined them at the Centre many times. He is with them now as we speak today.

And to each of my 337 colleagues in this House, Mr. Speaker, remember that we are all leaders in our communities. At times like these, our communities need our leadership. It is in these moments that we must show ourselves worthy of the honour of sitting in this place.

Reach out to your friends and neighbours. Gather your communities. Be there for your people. They need you.  

To the injured, to the family members of these innocent victims, to the people of Quebec, and to all Canadians—

Know that we will get to the bottom of this. Such senseless violence has no place in Canadian society.

I’d like to express my deepest gratitude to the first responders, and thank local law enforcement officials, local government officials, and the Government of Quebec. I can assure Canadians that we will be working closely together in the days ahead.

I’d also like to thank the many political and faith leaders from around the world who have reached out since last night’s events. Your thoughts and condolences are greatly appreciated.

Canada has long been a diverse and accepting nation. We are kind. We are generous. And we embrace one another, not in spite of our differences, but because of them.

It is in tragic moments like this that we must come together in order to move forward. Canadians will not be broken by this violence. Our sense of spirit, and our sense of unity, will only strengthen.

The people who commit these acts mean to test our resolve, and weaken our values. They aim to divide us. To sow discord and plant hatred.

We will not close our minds. We will open our hearts.

Mr. Speaker, my friends, my fellow Canadians: let us strive to be the best version of ourselves in this dark hour.

To the more than one million Canadians who profess the Muslim faith, I want to say directly:

We are with you. 36 million Canadian hearts are breaking with yours.

And know that we value you. You enrich our shared country in immeasurable ways. It is your home.

Last night’s horrible crime against the Muslim community was an act of terror committed against Canada, and against all Canadians.

We will grieve with you. We will defend you. We will love you. And we will stand with you.

Over the coming days, take solace in one another. We will mourn this devastating attack, and we will heal, together. As one community, as one country, and as one family.

Canadians will not be intimidated. We will not meet violence with more violence.

We will meet fear and hatred with love and compassion.

Always.

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

Good afternoon.

Thank you for your kind welcome.

Before I begin, I’d like to recognize the Algonquin Nation, on whose traditional territory we are gathering.  We acknowledge them as the past, present and future caretakers of this land.

Elders, youth, veterans, National Chief Bellegarde, members of the AFN executive and Chiefs-in-Assembly: thank you for giving me the chance to be here with you today.        

It was back in January of 2013 that I watched – with deep respect and admiration – a group of young Cree leave their remote and northern Quebec community of Whapmagoostui and begin a 1600-kilometre trek through frigid weather.

Like so many Canadians, I watched them make their way by snowshoe, and then by foot, during that two-month journey to Ottawa.

Along the way, their numbers had grown from seven to over 400 on that morning in March when they walked into this town to the sound of traditional drums. We all know the Journey of the Nishiyuu: the Journey of the People.

I was one of many to meet them upon their arrival.  The “Original Seven”: David, Stanley, Travis, Johnny, Raymond, Geordie, and Isaac.

The tenacity, the determination and boldness of spirit that fuelled these youth inspired a nation, and brought the concerns of their community to the forefront.

Today, we gather in the capital of this nation, as many nations. 

We gather here in this moment to reflect on the first year of the journey to build a new relationship, one based on recognition and respect.

The Indigenous and Non-Indigenous Peoples of Canada have begun our own new walk together.  And together we’ve taken the first steps in what we all know is going to be a multi-generational journey.

In this spirit, no one here fools him- or herself that the path our country overwhelmingly agreed to take will always be a gentle one, or an easy one. We’ve already felt some headwinds. And there will be more.

I do not take my call for a nation-to-nation relationship with Indigenous Peoples lightly.

I wake up every morning encouraged that we are finally doing this together, and each morning I wake up in anticipation of what new places we’ll find together.

And each morning I wake up with fresh resolve that we will keep pushing forward, like the Nishiyuu Walkers, until we reach our destination.

But unlike the Nishiyuu Walkers, who were happy to return home to their community and to the love of their families, we know that the past we are leaving behind us is not a good or happy place.

For all of us gathered here who are on our trek together, there is no giving up and turning around and heading back to the place where we all just last year so strongly agreed to move away from.

Not only can’t we go back there again: none of us wants to.

Jody Wilson-Raybould is Canada’s first Indigenous Minister of Justice and Attorney General.  

Not only is she the right person – Indigenous or otherwise – for this central role, she is our government’s loud and clear message to our country that the laws of this land that were, and in many ways still are, used to control and constrain Indigenous Peoples are now the particular responsibility of a First Nations person.  An Indigenous woman.

She, along with her Cabinet colleagues, will now lead a joint effort with Indigenous Peoples, aimed at de-colonializing Canada’s laws and policies that for so long have held back, rather than recognized, Indigenous rights.

My government supports the 94 calls to action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. The work the Commission has done is some of the most important work ever in this country.  Each of the 94 needs to be implemented.

Indeed, as the one-year anniversary approaches, I am pleased to confirm that progress is underway on 36 of the 45 calls to action that are under solely federal purview.

We all know that addressing them thoroughly and with due diligence will take time.  I understand that many of you in this room are impatient. I know many of the people you serve are impatient. I am impatient too. But I’m encouraged by the meaningful progress we’ve already made. 

In May, Minister Bennett went to the UN to make clear our government’s unqualified support for the United Nations Declaration for the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  We remain committed to its adoption and implementation in full partnership and in consultation with Indigenous Peoples.

I have asked Minister Wilson-Raybould to lead the work collectively with her Cabinet colleagues and First Nations, the Métis Nation and Inuit Peoples to ensure that this gets done.

Since forming government, we have lifted 14 long-term drinking water advisories in First Nations communities, and we’re on track to have nearly half of remaining advisories eliminated within three years. We will lift all drinking water advisories in First Nations communities within our original five-year deadline.

As a teacher, I’m especially excited that this year, almost 2000 students started the school year in six brand-new schools. There are now 31 new schools under construction on reserve. Another 27 are being designed, and a further 72 are in feasibility studies.

I’m also excited that later this month, Canada’s first First Nations School Board Agreement in Manitoba is expected to be signed.  I know there are active discussions in other provinces to do the same.  

And as we all know, a federal government-mandated independent inquiry has been launched into the national horror and continuing trauma of Murdered and Missing Indigenous Women and Girls. And let me tell you one thing: to put it bluntly, this issue has always been and will always be on my radar.

We need to do more. But we have thousands of kids in new schools, we have 14 communities with clean water that didn’t have it before and have begun to get justice for sisters and daughters across the country. All in our first year.

Canadians now understand that, as Senator Murray Sinclair stated, reconciliation in this country isn’t just an Indigenous issue and problem – it is a Canadian issue and problem that we all need to address in real and concrete ways.

My government and the Assembly of First Nations have worked together to make early progress – not only against an important list of recommendations, but also in a new spirit of cooperation that will bring us closer to the goal of true reconciliation.

We must together show Canadians that we are working in unison to correct the historical wrongs and continuing intergenerational trauma that affects so many Indigenous Peoples.

You don’t need me to tell you how much more work still needs to be done.  It is a lived experience for many of you.  And our government remains committed to making meaningful and timely progress on the issues that matter most to you and your communities.

That includes working hard to close the persistent gaps that exist between Indigenous and Non-Indigenous Peoples when it comes to employment opportunities, income, and housing.

It includes building the infrastructure your communities need to be safe, healthy places to live.

It includes doing more to address the unique needs of Indigenous children and youth, whose desperation is matched by a desire to succeed – something that is, sadly, too often ignored until it is too late.

We know all too well how residential schools and other decisions by governments were used as a deliberate tool to eliminate Indigenous languages and cultures. If we are to truly advance reconciliation, we must undo the lasting damage that resulted.

So today, I commit to you that our government will enact an Indigenous Languages Act, co-developed with Indigenous Peoples, with the goal of ensuring the preservation, protection, and revitalization of First Nations, Métis, and Inuit languages in this country.

All of us gathered in this room today must never allow Canadians, including Indigenous Peoples, to think or believe that reconciliation can’t or won’t work.

It is of the greatest imperative that all of us here never allow Canadians the chance to fear that due to a lack of joint leadership, of a true nation-to-nation dialogue and relationship, we aren’t able to achieve this most vital of goals.

Yes, we have a long way to go, but let’s not forget that we’ve also come a long way already. We must show Canada that we are partners.

This past summer, The Tragically Hip showed a whole nation how we can come together in a powerful and positive way. I heard Gord Downie that night in Kingston. And with your honouring him today, I know you heard him, too.

Indeed, 12 million Canadians heard him that night. Gord, in simple and elegant words, used that moment to advocate and advance by many years the reconciliation dialogue in our country.

Gord embodies all Canadians’ desire for reconciliation.

Just as your honouring him today is an act of reconciliation. The same way the young Cree Nishiyuu walker, David Kawapit, summoned his friends to take a leap of faith with him in a long walk of reconciliation, it is these individual acts that will help get our country where it needs and deserves to be.

I recently heard my friend Joseph Boyden speak to reconciliation and why it is so necessary.

He asked Canadians to understand the damage residential schools caused to Indigenous Peoples by comparing it to a great tsunami in slow motion advancing over the course of 140 years, destroying homes, splintering families, drowning children.

This tsunami in slow motion left no home untouched. But the tsunami has reached its high water mark and it now recedes.

And the artists are the ones asked to be the beachcombers wandering the shoreline, sifting through the debris and beginning to take the pieces they find to build something new in the wake of the destruction.

What they re-build won’t be the same as what it was before. But it can be just as strong and as beautiful if we all come together to create it.

It’s up to all of us to rebuild a new relationship.  All Canadians: teachers and students and construction workers and lawyers and police officers and parents. And especially those of us gathered in this room.

All of us, including the Chiefs in this room, need to challenge ourselves on our approach to governance. We need to constantly be ensuring that all voices in the community are heard, and served by their leadership. We can’t forget what we are all here to do. To serve our communities.

Decades ago now, the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples described many of the concerns I hear today from‎ Indigenous youth. The commission told us how youth are wary of government. Federal government certainly, but also Indigenous government. That their concerns are not taken seriously, that their voices are not heard.

The advice of the Royal Commission was right then, and it's right today - that's why we all should support a vision of governance in communities that work for, respond to, and is inclusive of Indigenous youth. This is something we can and must do together.

In the spirit of honouring our youth as well who begin the journey and don’t ever quit, let’s agree that we move forward to build our visions of our country that will propel us into the next centuries.

I have seen firsthand the struggles of so many of our northern and remote communities, and every opportunity has cemented my resolve and deepened my understanding of reconciliation.  It made me see very clearly what reconciliation means.

It means that if you are a child living on reserve, you should be able to turn on the tap and have clean water come out.  Water that you can drink, and bathe in, without fear.

It means that if you are a parent, when you say goodnight to your child you know that your child will be alive and well the next morning when you awake.

It means that if you are an Indigenous woman, you should not fear violence perpetrated against you when you walk down the street.

These are just a few examples of things most Canadians take for granted. Things I know that everyone gathered here wants for their communities. My government is acting on these issues.

Another fundamental issue is education.  Simply put, we need to do a better job of improving education and educational outcomes for Indigenous students, the fastest-growing demographic in schools across the country.

Education both in the classroom, and out of it. First Nations-led, First Nations- governed, culturally appropriate and sensitive education takes many forms, and is found in many different settings: in the classroom, in the home, and on the land.

I believe that reconciliation will have firmly taken root in this country when the rest of Canada can look at the schools of First Nations communities as the shining light for a full and well-rounded education in all its many forms.  When First Nations- governed schools are the envy of others.

Indigenous control of Indigenous education within a new nation-to-nation relationship, is a means to an end in ensuring culturally appropriate and quality education for Indigenous students. 

The desire is there to make this a reality. And so is the energy, and the willpower. Let’s all agree tonight to work together on a nation-to-nation level to make this an achievable goal, moving forward.

To nuture a nation-to-nation relationship, there has to be trust. Mutual trust.

I refuse to engage in or to ever use policies that aim to ignore, and then belittle, then attack, and finally blame the recipients of that bad policy.

If we are to move forward in a nation-to-nation relationship, we have to try new things.  To take risks, even.  Some of what we try will work, some of it won’t.  Some of it will work for some nations, but not others. But we can’t be afraid to try.  Part of rebuilding trust includes being willing to try, together.

Reconciliation does not mean that we, or even all members within this proud assembly, will agree on everything.

I know that there are people in this room who deeply disagree with our position to move ahead with the Kinder Morgan pipeline. I know there are people here who agree with it. I also know that there are people who deeply disagree with our position not to move forward with the Northern Gateway pipeline, just as there are those who agree with it.

The test of our relationship is not whether we’ll always agree. The test of our relationship is whether we can still move forward, together.

Working together also means sharing what we know and learning from each other.  Whether that’s traditional knowledge or statistical data, if we are to collectively work on helping communities heal and succeed, this is vital. All of us need hard data in order to make decisions both small and large.

Those of us gathered in this room have the historic opportunity to define, together, what this relationship based on recognition will look like for generations to come. 

Let’s not allow others to define our relationship for us or squander this extraordinary opportunity out of fear, mistrust or doubt.

Let’s never give others the chance to think that we can’t make this work, or don’t care to.

Instead, let’s look at the road ahead and take each step together with resolve.  We’re in the early days of this journey. 

I know that we will disagree at times – on which path to take, or at what pace.  Some of us might want to push on, others will need to rest. 

The important thing is that we keep moving forward, and that we keep moving forward together.

Because our reward at the end is not a destination.  It’s a new and stronger and better Canada.

I did not take lightly what I said to each minister when I asked them to be in my Cabinet: no relationship is more important to me and to Canada than the one with Indigenous Peoples.

It is time for a renewed, nation-to-nation relationship with Indigenous Peoples, one that is based on recognition of rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership.

We are truly on a Journey of the Nishiyuu, a Journey of the People.

On our journey we need to speak openly and honestly – bluntly, if we have to –just as we need to listen to the wisdom of our own elders.

And we must never forget the passion and energy of our youth.

All of them are watching us.

All of Canada is listening to us.

Let’s do right – in memory of those who have come before us, and in sacred respect for generations to follow.   

Miigwetch. Kinanaskomitin.

Mashi cho. Gilakas'la. Tshinashkumitinau. Thank you. Merci. 

Good afternoon everyone. Thank you for taking the time to join us today.

Just over a year ago, Canadians elected a new government. Their marching orders for us were clear: build an economy that works for me and my family, and protect the environment so we can leave a better, cleaner country to our kids.

Voters rejected the old thinking that what is good for the economy is bad for the environment. They embraced the idea that we need strong environmental policies if we expect to develop our natural resources and get them to international markets.

Canadians know that strong action on the environment is good for the economy. It makes us more competitive, by fostering innovation and reducing pollution. Canadians value clean air and water, beautiful coasts and wilderness, and refuse to accept that they must be compromised in order to create growth.

We agree.

Since last November, we have worked hard to put in place a policy that gives life to these values. A new policy that we believe will create good middle class jobs, and protect the environment for our kids and grandkids.

We approved natural resource projects that meet the highest standards of environmental protection.

We created a policy to put a price on pollution, and an Ocean Protection Plan to preserve our coasts.

And we just announced our intention to phase out coal-powered electricity in Canada by 2030, all while expanding clean power sources. This phase out will prevent more than 1,000 premature deaths and save taxpayers billions of dollars in health costs.

We are doing all of this because we know the world is changing, and Canada must change with it. Climate change is real. It is here. And it cannot be wished or voted away.

Canadians know this, and they know we need to transition to a clean energy economy. We owe it to ourselves to make our economy more competitive, and to our kids to leave them a cleaner environment.

But we also know that this transition will take investment, and it won’t happen in a day. We need to create good jobs and strong growth to pay for it.

Canada is a country rich in energy of all kinds. Conventional and renewable. The energy of today and tomorrow. That is a unique and tremendously positive place to be in the world.

I have said many times that there isn’t a country in the world that would find billions of barrels of oil and leave it in the ground while there is a market for it.

But it isn’t enough to just use that resource for our short-term interest.

Our challenge is to use today’s wealth to create tomorrow’s opportunity. Ultimately, this is about leaving a better country for our kids than the one we inherited from our parents.

Today, we are taking a strong step in that direction.

We are here to announce the Government of Canada’s decisions on major energy projects, and the fulfillment of some very significant commitments we made to Canadians during last fall’s election campaign.

We said that major pipelines could only get built if we had a price on carbon, and strong environmental protections in place. We said that Indigenous peoples must be respected, and be a part of the process.  We also said that we would only approve projects that could be built and run safely.

And that’s how we’ve come to our decisions today.

First, the Government of Canada has approved the Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain Expansion Project.

This pipeline will twin a line that has been in operation since 1953, which extends from Edmonton, Alberta, to Burnaby, British Columbia. The project will effectively triple our capacity to get Canadian energy resources to international markets beyond the Unites States.

It will create 15,000 new, middle class jobs – the majority of them in the trades. This major initiative will get hardworking Canadians back to work, put food on the table for middle class families, and grow and strengthen our communities.

It will give much needed new hope to thousands of hard-working people in Alberta’s conventional energy sector, who have suffered a great deal over the past few years.

Aside from the many and obvious economic benefits, we approved this project because it meets the strictest of environmental standards, and fits within our national climate plan.

We will require that Kinder Morgan meet or exceed all 157 of the binding conditions set out by the National Energy Board. These conditions address potential impacts on Indigenous communities, the protection of local wildlife, and the offset of greenhouse gas emissions during construction.

And let me say this definitively: We could not have approved this project without the leadership of Premier Notley, and Alberta’s Climate Leadership Plan – a plan that commits to pricing carbon and capping oilsands emissions at 100 megatonnes per year.

We want to be clear on this point, because it is important and sometimes not well understood. Alberta’s climate plan is a vital contributor to our national strategy. It has been rightly celebrated as a major step forward by industry and the environmental community.

It caps emissions from oilsands over the mid-term, but allows for production to increase from present levels. Today, Canada’s pipelines are operating at full capacity. That means any significant new production must find another way to get to market. Those modes of transport are less safe than pipelines.

Indeed, we know that new, state of the art pipelines provide the safest route to get our resources to market. This is not an argument. It is a fact. So from this perspective, creating new pipeline capacity is the most responsible decision we could make to ensure public safety and mitigate risk.   

We also could not approve this project without the best in class marine safety standards and capability we are putting in place through the Government of Canada’s new Oceans Protection Plan. The Trans Mountain expansion will increase vessel traffic in the Burrard Inlet by 13% overall, and the Oceans Protection Plan will make sure that any risk coming from increased vessel traffic in Burrard Inlet is properly mitigated.

We understand — and share — the deep and abiding sense of responsibility British Columbians feel for our spectacular west coast. Indeed, it is a personal issue for me. I spent much of my childhood on the coast and on the water with my grandparents. I worked and lived in BC for years as a teacher.

Now, I have heard and listened very carefully to the many diverse perspectives that exist in BC on this project. Indeed, one of its most articulate and substantive critics is a caucus colleague, Terry Beech.

Others will be opposed to this project for their own reasons. We respect that, and we respect their right to hold and voice their beliefs.

But to them — and to all Canadians — I want to say this: if I thought this project was unsafe for the BC coast, I would reject it. This is a decision based on rigorous debate, on science and on evidence. We have not been and will not be swayed by political arguments -- be they local, regional or national.

We have made this decision because we are convinced it is safe for BC, and it is the right one for Canada. It is a major win for Canadian workers, Canadian families, and the Canadian economy.

Second, we have also approved the Line 3 Replacement Project.

This project replaces over 1,000km of an existing pipeline from Hardisty, Alberta, to Gretna, Manitoba. It will create 7,000 new, good jobs for tradespeople. It will be required to meet or exceed 37 binding conditions from the National Energy Board.

Fundamentally, this is a safety issue.

On Line 3, the reality is this: This aging pipeline is in dire need of replacement. Once completed, this new infrastructure will increase efficiency, improve workplace and environmental safety, and ensure that the latest technology is in place to prevent leaks.

Trans Mountain’s unique strategic value is it will give traditional Canadian energy resources access to international markets beyond the United States. Line 3 will renew aging infrastructure to ensure we can continue to supply resources to our most important and valued trading partner.

Taken together, these projects will create thousands of good, middle class jobs for Canadians. They’ll also generate billions of dollars in government revenue at all levels.

That’s money that can be invested in our hospitals, roads, and clean energy initiatives.

These projects have received government approval because they meet our standards on the environment. But not all pipelines meet these strict criteria.

Today, we are also announcing that the Government of Canada has directed the National Energy Board to dismiss the application for the Northern Gateway Pipelines Project.

It has become clear that this project is not in the best interests of the local affected communities, including Indigenous peoples.

The Great Bear Rainforest is no place for a pipeline, and the Douglas Channel is no place for oil tanker traffic.

Even before we formed government, we were clear about our intentions to protect the Great Bear Rainforest and Sea. This unique and beautiful ecosystem thrives with diverse wildlife, and supplies an abundant and sustainable economy to the tens of thousands of people who depend on its health. It is a jewel of Canada’s west coast.

Finally, I am also pleased to announce that we will keep our commitment to implement a moratorium on crude oil tanker shipping on British Columbia’s north coast.

After consulting at length with people who live and work there – including Indigenous partners – we’ve heard firsthand how detrimental crude oil tanker traffic is to this region.

Very shortly, we’ll introduce legislation to make this tanker moratorium the law.

As a grandson of BC, I strongly believe that this moratorium – coupled with the rejection of the Northern Gateway Pipeline – is the right call for the people of this province, and for Canada.

The four decisions we’ve announced today were all made after rigorous consultation and examination of the evidence.

We believe they will help provide the growth and resources we need to spur Canada’s clean energy transition. We believe they prove that responsible resource development can go hand in hand with strong environmental protection.

We believe they are safe, responsible and in the interest of all Canadians.

Most importantly, we believe they will help achieve the vital mission Canadians sent us here to achieve: to make progress. To leave a cleaner, more prosperous country to our kids than the one we inherited from our parents.

These Decisions reflect a true team effort, and we are very much looking forward to taking your questions.

Hello, Everyone.

It is a real pleasure for me to be with you today—as Prime Minister of Canada, but especially as a proud Francophone.  

I would like to thank the President of the Republic of Madagascar and the Malagasy people for their warm welcome. I would also like to mention that the President studied at a Canadian university, the Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières. So his background is an indication of the wide variety of ties that are being formed between the countries and citizens of the Francophone world.

I would also like to thank my good friend, the Secretary General and former Governor General of Canada, Michaëlle Jean, for her great work at the head of the International Organisation of La Francophonie. Michaëlle, your leadership is a source of pride for all Canadians.

The IOF is an organization that is making an important contribution in a constantly changing world, through its actions and its shared values.

For Canadians, membership in La Francophonie is based on a common language, history and culture that unite us from one end of our vast nation to the other. And it is also a window into a rich and diverse world, with plenty of differences, but united in its values and aspirations.  

And so, although many challenges remain, there are also many opportunities.

The countries of Africa play a central role in La Francophonie.

As you know, Africa is the continent with the youngest population in the world. This represents boundless potential for its countries, but for also for Canada, which is re‑engaging with Africa to be a reliable long-term partner.   

As a father and as the minister responsible for Youth, I take every opportunity to remind people that our youth are not the leaders of tomorrow, they are already the leaders of today!

Our challenge is to give them a strong voice, to listen to them and to incorporate their viewpoints in our decisions. Our challenge is also to give them and subsequent generations a clean and healthy environment by providing the means to actively combat pollution and climate change. One way to do this is by implementing the Paris Agreement.

Young people today are citizens of the world—they want to discover, learn, broaden their horizons. They are open‑minded and have a thirst for freedom and equality that no other generation before them has matched.  

So let’s let them contribute!

All of us must also ensure that women and girls are given their rightful place.  

I am a feminist. And I am extremely proud of that.

Women and girls have a key role to play in politics, in business, in conflict resolution and in peacekeeping. They must fully participate in society. And it is not just up to women to speak out, but we men need to as well. It is our fight, too.

Because when women and girls succeed, we all reap the benefits.

But for women to succeed, we must first ensure that their human rights are respected. The right to live without violence, the right to free choice in matters of their sexual and reproductive health, the right to equality, and the right to participate fully and completely in society.

And yet, these rights are still violated far too often. Women and girls are victims of physical and sexual violence. They are married off, often at a young age, without their consent. They cannot freely and safely access abortion. They are subjected to genital mutilation.  

Enough! There is no excuse for such practices, for such violations of their human rights. All of us together, women and men, have the duty to create the conditions that women and girls need to reach their full potential.

Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities are suffering in too many countries, including in some member countries of La Francophonie here today. We owe them the same respect, the same rights and the same dignity as we give all other members of our society.

We are faced with other challenges, too, the foremost being the threat of radicalization and violent extremism.  

We know now that isolated or marginalized individuals are more likely to become radicalized or fall into the grips of extremist groups. Conversely, people who feel included, valued and fully appreciated have a much greater chance of making a positive contribution to society.  

Therefore, to prevent radicalization, we must implement prevention strategies. This includes creating a society where diversity is celebrated and where we maintain an ongoing dialogue with members of minority communities.

And because too often our young people are more vulnerable to radicalization, we must do more for them, by offering all young people the vocational training they need so they can enter the job market and help their society thrive.

We often have discussions regarding issues of identity. Canadian identity is built upon the values of diversity, inclusion and democracy. These values are at the very core of our success. They contribute to strengthening and growing our middle class.

We are a multicultural country with two official languages, and we are as proud of our shared values as we are of our differences. Our languages and cultures are a window to the world for our children and those who choose to make Canada home.

I would like to share a few words now, in English, with my Anglophone counterparts, who have embraced the bilingual nature of our country.

Canada’s character as a bilingual country is part of its very fabric. It teaches us every day to be stronger, more open. And Canada’s participation in La Francophonie provides us with a unique platform to promote our values of openness and diversity as well as our agenda of empowerment for all.  

Today, we, the Francophones of Canada, are a vital part of this open and plural society. And it is why we are ready to play a leading role within the international Francophone community.

We have the proof right before us, as Canadians are represented at this Summit not only by the federal government, but also by the governments of Quebec and New-Brunswick. These governments have been long active within the Canadian and international Francophonie, and they have provided outstanding leadership.

The Government of Ontario is now seeking to join the IOF as an observer, which we are all very proud of. Ontario, home to some 600,000 Francophones and millions of francophiles, will certainly make a major contribution to the organization. Canada stands firm behind Ontario’s candidacy and urges all IOF members to do the same.

As a Quebecer, I would also like to applaud the ongoing efforts of the Quebec government to protect and promote the French language. It has gone beyond defending our beautiful language. Not only has the Quebec government ensured the bilingual nature of Canada, but it has also been crucial to the vitality and strength of our language at home and abroad.

We are here for our Francophone communities in Canada and here for Francophones and francophiles across the globe.

We are determined to strengthen the ties that we already have. We are committed to forging new bonds with countries that share our vision of a better, more just world.

My friends, we need to bring about the positive change we want to see. It is our role to share our values with the other Francophone and francophile societies.

The 21st century belongs to us if, together, we are prepared to take on the challenges that we face.

The opportunities open to us are unprecedented; it is up to us to grasp them.

Member countries have a crucial role to play in the legacy that we will leave our children and grandchildren.

By offering a helping hand now, we can meet their expectations and their eagerness:   for a better world that we can build on together in the future.  

Thank you.

Hello everyone! It’s great to be back in Vancouver.

Thanks, Marc, for your hard work, for the warm welcome, and for everything you do as Minister of Transport.

It’s an honour to be here today on the traditional territory of the Coast Salish people, home of the Musqueam, Squamish and Tsleil-Waututh.

As many of you know, Transport Canada has been working hard with Indigenous communities across the country lately. So thank you, Marc – to you and your entire team.

And I’d also like to shout out Vancouver Centre’s fantastic and much-beloved Member of Parliament, Dr. Hedy Fry. She continues to do great work on behalf of the people of BC in Ottawa. Thanks for being here, Hedy.

And thanks to our entire BC team.

Thank you, everyone, for being here. This is a really exciting day for Canadians from coast to coast to coast, and I’m glad you could join us.

Let me start by saying that it’s great to be here at HMCS Discovery, and it’s a real pleasure to be back in beautiful British Columbia.

This amazing province is, in many ways, home to me. It has been my whole life –as a kid, as a young adult, and now, as a father and husband. And I’ve got some particularly cherished memories to show for it.

I remember, as a kid, being brought by my grandmother to sailing lessons at Jericho Beach– great memories set against bright blue water and gorgeous views of the North Shore.

And I also remember exploring Cypress Creek with my younger brothers, Sacha and Michel, and my Grandpa Jimmy.

As a young man, I taught French and math at schools across Vancouver, including West Point Grey and Sir Winston Churchill.

And even now, as a father, husband, and leader, I always find myself coming back to the coast.

I kicked off the federal election campaign marching in Vancouver Pride.

I hiked the Grouse Grind last summer.

And a few months back, I spent some quality time with my family, exploring Tofino and surfing at Chesterman Beach.

Now, you may be wondering: Why am I reminding you of all this? Why am I sharing these memories with you?

Well, it’s because I want you to know why I cherish this place. I want you to know why it’s important to me. And I want you to know that, in my capacity as Prime Minister, I will do my best to ensure that my kids – and all of your kids – get to enjoy the West Coast just as I have, just as we all have, for many years to come.

The ongoing incident at Bella Bella is unacceptable. I know this. You know this. Canadians know this. It’s time for a change.

As a community, we need to protect our magnificent oceans – and re-opening the Kitsilano Coast Guard base this summer was an important first step.

But indeed, that was only a down-payment on our larger plan. We must make sure we protect all of our coastlines, not just the one we’re on right now.

As we know, Canada is blessed with some of the most spectacular coastlines in the world. They give Canadians and visitors alike places to live, work, and play.

Our coasts are the traditional territory of Indigenous communities; they are habitats for rich biodiversity and precious ecosystems; and they offer unparalleled economic, recreational, and tourism opportunities.

And it’s up to all of us to keep it that way.

That is why, today, I am very pleased to announce the Government of Canada’s Oceans Protection Plan.

This robust, national plan will protect our oceans and coastlines from the damage that comes from shipping and pollution.

These measures are progressive and proactive, and will ensure the health of our oceans for generations to come.

With this new plan, Canada will have one of the best marine safety and emergency preparation systems in the world.

These strong measures are urgently needed and long overdue. This represents the most significant investment ever made to protect our oceans and coastlines.

So let me tell you about just a few of the measures outlined in our plan.

We’re going to strengthen the Canadian Coast Guard and boost their presence to ensure our waters are better protected 24/7.

We’re going to get tough on businesses and industries that pollute along our coasts.

We’re going to preserve and restore our marine ecosystems, by introducing a new fund for coastal habitat restoration. In that same vein, we will introduce new legislation to increase vessel owner responsibility and liability for abandoned and wrecked vessels. 

We’re going to re-open the Maritime Rescue Sub-Centre in St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador.

We’re going to collect and share better information on marine tanker and vessel traffic with coastal communities, so we can work together to prevent spills.

And, most important, we invite Indigenous communities to partner with us to effectively co-manage our oceans. This includes launching Indigenous Community Response Teams here in BC to help respond to coastal emergencies, if and when they arise.

All this is in addition to many other important measures that will protect our coastlines, and the people who call them home.

This ambitious, forward-thinking plan is all about protecting the environment, ensuring efficient transportation, maintaining public safety, and yes, creating jobs.

Our Oceans Protection Plan will result in a truly world class system for marine protection and emergency preparedness – one that will meet or surpass the world-leading marine safety practices of Alaska and Norway.

And as a grandson of BC, I’m thrilled at what this means for folks out here.

You know, as a government, everything we do, and every action we take, is done with one goal in mind: We want to leave our kids and grandkids with a better place to live – whether we’re creating good, well-paying jobs for the middle class; ensuring our communities are safe and protected; or taking the necessary action to safeguard our environment.

And by working together with our partners along the coasts and across the country, I know we can preserve our coastlines for generations to come.

Thank you very much for being here today. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

I have had many opportunities over the past year – over the past number of years, really – to reflect on Canada’s success.

And every time we have done something well, whether it was decades ago with Medicare and CPP, or more recently getting our national debt under control in the 1990s, taking steps to ensure the stability of our banking system, or responding to a global refugee crisis, our success has been rooted in two things.

First, that when we see a problem, we don’t walk away from it, or deny that it exists. Instead, we lean in. We work hard – and we work together – to solve the problems that come our way.

And second, when we say we’re going to do something, we follow through. We live up to our commitments. The world expects that of us. So do the markets. And so do our fellow Canadians.

It is in that very Canadian spirit of solving problems and keeping promises that I address the House today, and share the government’s plan for pricing carbon pollution.

After decades of inaction, after years of missed opportunities, we will finally take real and concrete measures to build a clean economy, create more opportunities for Canadians, and make our world better for our children and grandchildren.

Mr. Speaker, we will not walk away from science, and we will not deny the unavoidable.

With the plan put forward by the government, all Canadian jurisdictions will have put a price on carbon pollution by 2018.

To do that, the government will set a floor price for carbon pollution.

The price will be set at a level that will help Canada reach its targets for greenhouse gas emissions, while providing businesses with greater stability and improved predictability.

Provinces and territories will have a choice in how they implement this pricing. They can put a direct price on carbon pollution, or they can adopt a cap-and-trade system, with the expectation that it be stringent enough to meet or exceed the federal benchmark.

The government proposes that the price on carbon pollution should start at a minimum of $10 per tonne in 2018, rising by $10 each year to $50 per tonne in 2022.

Provinces and territories that choose cap-and-trade systems will need to decrease emissions in line to both Canada’s target and to the reductions expected in jurisdictions that choose a price-based system.

If neither price nor cap and trade is in place by 2018, the Government of Canada will implement a price in that jurisdiction.

Whatever approach is chosen, this policy will be revenue neutral for the federal government. All revenues generated under this system will stay in the province or territory where they are generated.

Because pollution crosses borders, all provinces must do their part.

And to make sure that this plan continues to meet Canada’s targets, it will be reviewed at the end of five years, in 2022.

As we are talking today, the Minister of the Environment and Climate Change is discussing the details of this plan with our provincial and territorial partners.

Over the next two months, the government will work closely with the provinces, territories and Aboriginal organizations to finalize this plan.

These discussions are essential, because we know that no plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions can succeed without the help of our provincial and territorial partners, who have already shown great leadership in tackling climate change.

I am especially looking forward to meeting with provincial premiers and Aboriginal leaders on December 8 and 9 to finalize the details of this pan-Canada plan to fight climate change.

This framework will include not only the plan for pricing carbon pollution, but will also pave the way forward to better support innovation and jobs in the clean energy sector, manage the effects of climate change, and improve our capacity for adaptation and climate resilience.

I’d like to take this opportunity again to congratulate the provinces who have led on this file while the previous federal government abdicated its responsibility to all Canadians.

That era is over.

Of course, a plan is only as good as the principles on which it is based. And so I would like to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to talk about why the government has decided to act now to put pricing on carbon pollution.

There are many reasons to act now, and I am certain that the Members opposite are as familiar with those reasons as the government is, even if their track record suggests otherwise.

But today I would like to identify three of the biggest reasons why pricing carbon pollution is right for Canada, and for Canadians.

First, setting a price for carbon pollution will give us a significant advantage while we build a clean‑growth economy.

A reasonable and predictable price for carbon pollution will encourage innovation because businesses will have to find new ways to reduce their emissions and pollute less.

It will also make our businesses more competitive.

The global economy is becoming increasingly clean, and Canada cannot afford to be left behind.

Around the world, the markets are changing. They are moving away from products and services that create carbon pollution and turning to cleaner and more sustainable options.

By giving Canadian businesses the incentives they need to make this change, we are opening the door to new opportunities.

And you do not need to take my word for it, Mr. Speaker. Last summer, business leaders from across the country spoke out in favour of carbon pricing.

Retail leaders like Canadian Tire, Loblaws, IKEA and Air Canada.

Energy producers like Enbridge, Shell and Suncor.

Natural resource companies like Barrick Gold, Resolute Forest Products and Teck Resources.

And financial institutions like BMO, Desjardins, Royal Bank, Scotiabank and TD.

These businesses support carbon pricing because they know that – when it is done well – it is the most effective way to reduce emissions while continuing to grow the economy.

They know that a clean environment and a strong economy go hand in hand.

They are anxious to take advantage of the opportunities inherent in a clean-growth economy.

And they, like the government, recognize that if we do not act now, the Canadian economy will suffer.

The second reason to move ahead with pricing carbon pollution is the benefit it will deliver to Canadians – especially for the middle class and those working hard to join it.

As the business leaders I just mentioned put it, “… carbon pricing uses the market to drive clean investment decisions. It encourages innovation.”

That innovation brings with it new and exciting job prospects for Canadian workers.

As one example, last year, nearly a third of a trillion dollars was invested globally in renewable power – almost 50% more than was invested in power from fossil fuels. That’s a trend that will only accelerate, Mr. Speaker.

Simply put, there are billions of dollars, and hundreds of thousands of good, well-paying jobs on the table for the countries that get this right. Engineering, design and programming jobs. Manufacturing jobs – whether it’s solar panels or electric vehicles. Jobs researching and processing biofuels. Among many, many examples.

If we do not take full advantage of these opportunities now before us, we are doing Canadians a tremendous disservice.

Finally, I think that all Canadians will understand the third reason why we must move forward with pricing carbon pollution.

It has been proven that it is a good way to prevent heavy polluters from emitting greenhouse gases that fuel climate change and threaten the entire planet.

Carbon pricing is an effective way to reduce the pollution that threatens air quality and the quality of the oceans’ water.

Just last week, the World Health Organization published a report that said that 9 out of 10 people live in places with poor air quality. The consequences for human health are tremendous and devastating: each year, 3 million deaths are linked to air pollution.

We must – and we will – do better.

We’ve seen what can happen when governments take a stand for cleaner air. In 2005, in Toronto, there were 53 smog days. A decade later, thanks in large part to the phase-out of coal-fired generating stations, there were zero smog days.

This is a very big deal if your child has asthma, and can’t go outside to play with her friends during her summer vacation. Or if you have grandparents who have to miss out on family events because they find it difficult to breathe the air in their own backyard.

And if you live in Canada’s north, or in our coastal communities, or, really, Mr. Speaker, in any community that is subject to extreme weather conditions and the resulting floods, droughts, and wildfires, then the effects of climate change itself cannot be denied.

There is no hiding from climate change. It is real, and it is everywhere.

We cannot undo the last 10 years of inaction. What we can do is make a real and honest effort – today and every day – to protect the health of our environment, and with it, the health of all Canadians.

The Governor of the Bank of England – one of Canada’s best exports, by the way – has spoken to this issue on many occasions. And Mr. Carney has an interesting term for it. He calls the unwillingness to act “the tragedy of the horizon.”

What he means is that the truly catastrophic effects of climate change will be felt in the future. Or as he puts it, “beyond the traditional horizons of most actors, imposing a cost on future generations that the current one has no direct incentive to fix.”

With great respect to Mr. Carney – because I think when it comes to climate change, we are very much on the same page – I believe that current actors, such as the government, do have a direct incentive to fix things.

And if I may speak from a personal point of view, Mr. Speaker, I myself have three motivations. Their names are Xavier, Ella-Grace and Hadrien.

And I am not the only one who is concerned about the type of world that we will leave to the next generation and to generations after that.

From community to community, I have talked to parents and grandparents, who shared with me their concerns for the future, and who have challenged the government – and their provincial and community leaders – to take action immediately to avoid tragic and devastating consequences.

We hear their concerns, and we respect their voices. And it is because we respect the desire of Canadians that we will move forward with carbon pollution pricing.

Mr. Speaker, as you know, the government is not obliged to seek the approval of Parliament prior to ratifying the Paris Agreement, nor do we need the House to demonstrate its support for the Vancouver Declaration.

We have chosen to bring this issue before the House, however, because we think it is important that all parliamentarians – and through them, all Canadians – be given a chance to debate and vote on this crucial issue.

I look forward to what I hope will be a spirited yet respectful debate on this important topic. It is one that will shape the country we live in for generations to come.

Thank you.

Good afternoon.

Mr. President, fellow delegates, and friends. It is an honour to be with you today.

And it’s wonderful to be here in the great city of New York. Once again this week, New Yorkers showed us how to be resilient and resolute in the face of violent extremism.

On behalf of everybody in this room, let me say directly to the people of New York: you are a model to the world. And we thank you.

It is the responsibility of a leader to spend time with the people they were elected to serve.

If you want the real stories, you have to go where people live. Coffee shops and church basements, mosques and synagogues. Farmer’s markets. Public parks.

It was in places like that that I got the best sense of what Canadians were thinking, and how they were doing. And through the politeness—because we Canadians are always polite, even when we’re complaining—I learnt some things.

I talked with people my age who were trying to be hopeful about their future, but found it tough to make ends meet, even when they were working full time.

I heard from young Canadians who were frustrated. Who told me that they couldn’t get a job because they don’t have work experience, and they couldn’t get work experience because they don’t have a job.

I heard from women and girls who still face inequality in the workplace and violence just because they are women, even in a progressive country like Canada.

I met parents working hard to give their children every chance to succeed, but were afraid that their efforts won’t be enough.

And I had the opportunity to share meals with retired seniors who worked hard their whole lives and are now forced to rely on food banks.

I’ve had too many distressing conversations with Canadians over the past few years. But they made something very clear to me.

Canadians still believe in progress. Or at least, that progress is possible.

But that optimism is mixed with a lot of concern.

Obviously, Canadians are not alone in feeling that way. Those feelings are ubiquitous. That anxiety is a reality.

When leaders are faced with citizens’ anxiety, we have a choice to make.

Do we exploit that anxiety or do we allay it?

Exploiting it is easy. But in order to allay it, we need to be prepared to answer some very direct questions.

What will create the good, well-paying jobs that people want, and need, and deserve?

What will strengthen and grow the middle class, and help those working hard to join it?

What will build an economy that works for everyone?

What will help to make the world a safer, more peaceful place?

To allay people’s anxiety, we need to create economic growth that is broadly shared, because a fair and successful world is a peaceful world.

We need to focus on what brings us together, not what divides us.

For Canada, that means re-engaging in global affairs through institutions like the United Nations. It doesn’t serve our interests—or the world’s—to pretend we’re not deeply affected by what happens beyond our borders.

Earlier this year, we helped negotiate the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. As part of our commitment to implementing that agreement, we announced that Canada would invest $2.65 billion over five years to fund clean, low-carbon growth in developing countries.

In order to help promote peace and security in areas affected by instability, we reaffirmed our support for NATO and committed ourselves to expanding Canada’s role in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

And we hosted the Fifth Global Fund Replenishment Conference, where we increased our contribution by 20% by giving more than $800 million to the Global Fund. And we also encouraged our partners to increase their contributions, making it possible to raise $13 billion in support of ending AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria by 2030.

We’ve done all this—and will do much more—because we believe we should confront anxiety with a clear plan to deal with its root causes.

And we believe we should bring people together around shared purposes like the UN Sustainable Development Goals.

Because what is the alternative?

To exploit anxiety?

To turn it into fear and blame?

To reject others because they look, or speak, or pray differently than we do?

You see, in Canada we got a very important thing right. Not perfect, but right.

In Canada, we see diversity as a source of strength, not weakness. Our country is strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them.

And make no mistake: we have had many failures, from the internment of Ukrainian, Japanese and Italian Canadians during the World Wars; to our turning away boats of Jewish and Punjabi refugees; to the shamefully continuing marginalization of Indigenous Peoples.

What matters is that we learn from our mistakes, and recommit ourselves to doing better.

To that end, in recent months, Canadians have opened their arms and their hearts to families fleeing the ongoing conflict in Syria. And from the moment they arrived, those 31,000 refugees were welcomed—not as burdens, but as neighbours and friends. As new Canadians.

That effort brought Canadians together. In an almost unprecedented fashion, the government worked with the business community, engaged citizens and civil society to help the newcomers adapt to their new country.

But our efforts will not truly be successful until those refugees have become established, full-fledged members of the Canadian middle class.

And I want you to know that this objective is within our grasp—not because of what we have done, but because of what they are themselves.

You see, refugees are people with the same hopes and dreams as our own citizens.

But while our people have felt anxiety, Syrians faced catastrophe.

Do you want to know where Syria’s middle class is?

They’re living in refugee camps in Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan.

They’re moving across Europe, looking for a place to set down roots, get their kids back in school, find steady work, and be productive citizens.

Refugee camps are teeming with Syria’s middle class. Doctors and lawyers. Teachers and entrepreneurs. They’re well educated. They work hard. They care about their families. They want a better life—a safer and more secure future for their kids—as we all do.

So when I say that I hope that the Syrian refugees we welcomed will soon be able to join our middle class, I am confident that we can make that happen.

And we’ll do it by offering to them the same things we offer to all our citizens—a real and fair chance at success.

We’re going to do all we can to build a strong middle class in Canada.

We’re going to invest in education, because it gives the next generation the tools they need to contribute to the world economy and succeed.

We’re going to invest in infrastructure because it creates good, well-paying jobs for the middle class and helps to make our communities better places to live, work and invest.

We’re determined to build an economy that works for everyone—not just the wealthiest 1%—so that every person benefits from economic growth.

And we are going to refuse to give in to the pressure of trading our cherished values for easy votes. The world expects better from us, and we expect better from ourselves.

In the end, my friends, there is a choice to be made. Strong, diverse, resilient countries like Canada didn’t happen by accident, and they won’t continue without effort.

Every single day, we need to choose hope over fear, and diversity over division.

Fear has never fed a family nor created a single job.

And those who exploit it will never solve the problems that have created such anxiety.

Our citizens, the nearly 7.5 billion people we collectively serve, are better than the cynics and pessimists think they are.

They want their problems solved not exploited.

Listen, Canada is a modest country. We know we can’t solve these problems alone.

We know we need to do this all together.

We know it will be hard work.

But we’re Canadian. And we’re here to help. 

Thank you Chrystia, for that kind introduction, and thank you also for achieving important progress for Canadian canola farmers, including your father on his farm in Peace River, Alberta.  The work that you've done over these past few days, indeed, over these past many months, has been extraordinary on so many files in helping Canadians, in helping build relationships around the world.

Thank you, Chrystia, for all you’ve done.

It's wonderful to be here tonight.  It's wonderful to see so many friends in the room tonight.  People I didn't expect to see here who’ve come from Canada; people I've met, Chinese investors present in Canada who've gathered here tonight.  This is a wonderful celebration of a tremendous friendship that stretches back through the decades, but mostly will stretch forward decades and decades into the future.

I want to start by thanking the Canada China Business Council, its directors, benefactors, staff, and volunteers, for putting on this tremendous event.  I'd also like to acknowledge three of my many friends who are here with us tonight.

The first is my old friend Raymond Chan, who in 2004 became Canada's first Chinese Canadian cabinet minister.  Thank you for being here tonight, Raymond.

The next is Geng Tan, who's also here with us tonight and a current Member of Parliament.  Geng was born in Hunan and just last fall was elected as Canada's very first Member of Parliament from mainland China.

We also have Shaun Chen here, a strong, young member of our Chinese Canadian caucus.  And although Arnold Chan couldn't be with us here tonight, I know he wishes he could.  Indeed, our Parliament is lucky to have Chinese-Canadians in all political parties, representing communities across Canada in the House of Commons.

Now, Sophie, my wife, my daughter Ella-Grace and I have been in China for a little more than two days, but already we've been deeply touched by the incredible hospitality shown to us, and indeed, to our entire Canadian delegation.  So thank you, once again, for your warm and generous welcome.  It means a tremendous amount to us, and we're honoured to be your guests today, including the guests of His Excellency Yang Xiong, the Mayor of Shanghai.  Thank you all for your welcome.

This visit is taking place at a special time, a special time in the history of Canada as well as in the history of China. In fact, a crucial time in the history of our planet. And with that in mind, I want to share with you the reasons for this visit and what I hope to accomplish while we are here.

First and foremost, this visit is about renewing and deepening the relationship between the people of Canada and the people of China.  As you know, it's a relationship that historically has been close and warm, but more recently has perhaps been a little more distant or unfocused.  So I want to be as clear as I possibly can be on this point: China matters to Canada.

China's growth, its environmental progress, its economic success, the role it plays in the world, and the progress it makes on governance and the rule of law, all of these matter to Canadians and they matter to me.

I see three reasons why a stronger relationship between Canada and China benefits both countries.  The first has to do with strengthening and growing the middle class.  In Canada, we know that the heart of our economy rests with our middle class and all those working hard to join it.

These are the people who get up early every day, take their children to school, use public transit to get to work, and work hard to make ends meet for their family. They don’t ask for much. In fact, when you talk to them – and I have spent a lot of time with thousands of Canadians in communities across the country – you’ll see that all they want in return for their hard work is a real chance to succeed. In return, they simply ask for an opportunity to give their children a better world than the one they inherited from their own parents.

That same spirit, that same drive to do a little better and to be a little better exists everywhere in China as well.  And that's why it's so important to be very clear with people about what a stronger relationship means for our respective economies.

For Canadians it means that our businesses will have greater access to the large and rapidly growing Chinese and Asian economies.  That means a bigger market for quality Canadian food, like beef and pork, of course, but also for lobster and cherries.  It means more customers for Canadian financial services companies and more clients for design and engineering firms.

The rapid and wide-scale structural change now taking place in China's economy also means that trade and investment opportunities will continue to emerge and evolve.  Some of the clean technology now being developed in both countries was not on anyone's radar a generation ago, and we can't take advantage of tomorrow's opportunities if we don't work hard on building good relationships today because we know that when we do build strong and resilient relationships -- when we give Canadian businesses more opportunities to succeed -- they will succeed.  That means more better-paying jobs for Canadians, and when Canadian companies partner with Chinese companies, it means more and better-paying jobs here in China as well.

And so when I say that a stronger relationship between our two countries will benefit both countries, I'm thinking very much of the ways in which we can work together as partners to create jobs and strengthen the middle class in our communities and in yours.

Second, a stronger relationship between Ottawa and Beijing, one that strengthens and grows the middle class, will encourage economic growth as it opens doors and creates new opportunities for both Canadian and Chinese businesses to succeed.  A stronger relationship between Ottawa and Beijing leads to better opportunities between Montreal and Shanghai, Vancouver and Hong Kong, Waterloo and Hangzhou, and so forth.  And not just for the large multinational firms like Manulife and Huawei, but also for small and medium-size businesses like Nova Scotia's JusNova, which thanks to a local joint venture agreement, will be able to build a local manufacturing facility for wild blueberry products.

Or David Bromley Engineering, based in B.C., which will have a chance to deploy its innovative water treatment technology in Northern Alberta, thanks to private sector Chinese investors.

And on the research front we have deals like the one signed with the Sichuan Bohong Group to establish a joint auto engineering research lab at the University of Windsor.

Opportunities exist. They are real and important for jobs. Good, well-paying jobs in Canada and in China. And not just in traditional industries like natural resources or agri-food, but also in new sectors like clean tech.

The opportunities that exist are real and significant.  They don't just exist on paper, they are real jobs, as good, well-paying jobs in Canada and in China. And not just in traditional industries, such as natural resources or agriculture, but also in newer sectors like clean tech.

Now, I know that this room is filled with smart enterprising people who get things done.  But I also know that your work is easier when there is commitment at the highest level to building and nurturing strong, stable, long-term relationships between governments, and that's exactly what we're here to do.

China's leadership plays a central role in driving global economic growth.  Any economic strategy that ignores China or that treats the valuable relationship as anything less than critically important is not just short-sighted, it's irresponsible.

And as I have said, the benefits of a revitalized relationship go both ways.  Canada is an outstanding place to invest.  Canada is recognized as the best country in the G20 to do business.  We're home to the soundest banking system in the world and we have a workforce that is highly-educated and willing to work hard.

That's why smart investors, like the ones helping to create opportunities and jobs through JusNova, David Bromley Engineering, and dozens upon dozens of other examples, are turning to Canada.  Because they know a good deal when they see one.

And third, a stronger relationship will allow us to work together more effectively in a global context.  What we can accomplish by working together will always exceed what we can get by going it alone.  Think of the ways in which our cultural ties are deepened and strengthened by the experiences of young Chinese students who come to Canada to learn in our universities.  Or by the exchange of tourists.  Every year half a million Chinese tourists visit Canada, and it may surprise some of you to learn that similar numbers of Canadians come here every year.  And we're looking forward to seeing those numbers climb with our announcement that 2018 will be the year dedicated to Canada-China tourism.  Although, we're encouraging you all to get a head start, because next year is Canada's 150th birthday and in true Canadian fashion we're throwing open our doors and inviting the world to come celebrate with us.

But, of course, tourism is just one example.  Another example, one that truly has the potential to affect the lives of every person on the planet, is climate change.  Climate change is a global challenge; one that demands a global response.

As signatories to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, Canada and China have committed to both address the challenges that come with climate change and embrace the opportunities that it presents.  We have before us a chance to build a clean growth economy that will help to fight climate change while creating good, well-paying jobs for our citizens.

Just as Canada will look to ways to lead the clean energy transition, we know that China will do the same.  And it is our hope that in doing so we will take advantage of this historic opportunity to work together, to invest in each other, to build in our shared knowledge, and to grow our economies in ways that are as clean as they are competitive.

Finally, I think there are ways in which a stronger relationship makes it easier for our two countries to have regular, frank discussions on issues like good governance, human rights, and the rule of law.  Freedom of expression is a true Canadian value, one protected by our Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  You see, Canada has succeeded, culturally, politically, economically because of our diversity, not in spite of it.

That message was central to the platform that got us elected and has remained at the heart of how we have governed, and it was a message that I carried into my meetings this week, including those with President Xi and Premier Li.

I shared with them my strong conviction that acceptance of diverse perspectives will strengthen China, just as it has Canada.  In a world of rapid change, it is a diversity of ideas and the free ability to express them that drives positive change.  And I remind everyone that as a country that has seen first-hand the benefits of free expression and good governance, Canada encourages China to do more to promote and protect human rights.

In the global village we all have a stake in what happens here.  The success of the world is inexorably linked to China's success.  And I know that these are not easy conversations to have, but they are necessary ones.  And as important as it is to me that our government seeks greater economy cooperation with China, so too must we promote the values that make us good economic partners and good friends.  Friendship should be open, honest, and constructive.  In the end, what I'm after on behalf of 36 million Canadians, is a friendship built to last.

You see, we're Canadians.  We travel with our values and we don't hesitate to share them whenever and wherever we see opportunities.  And actually, there's an opportunity here tonight.  Gentlemen, it's 2016, we need more women at this head table.

So as you see, the future of the Canada-China relationship is one that I'm very passionate about.

It’s important to me because I sincerely believe that a renewed relationship between Canada and China is good for everyone. Because a stronger and more stable relationship can help build and grow the middle class; because a prosperous middle class can, in turn, encourage greater and more prosperous economic growth; and because a stronger relationship will enable both of our countries to work together to satisfy not just our own interests, but also the needs of the entire planet.

Now, before I finish, I want to take a moment to applaud the Canada China Business Council again for all the hard work it has done, in good times and in more challenging times, to foster this most important relationship.  It truly is a relationship that stretches back generations.  Back to my father, who visited this beautiful country many times, including during his time as Prime Minister with me in tow, because he recognized that a relationship with China was important.  Well, not for the first time, and not for the last, he was right about that.

But before that, to Dr. Norman Bethune, whose selflessness and generosity may have been rooted in his Canadian origins but found their highest expression right here in China.  And, of course, our business connections reach back further still, to the Bank of Montreal, Canada's first bank, which was the first to do business with China just three months after it was founded in 1818.

In other words, Canada and China have a long history together.  It's a history we should honour, even as we seek to forge new paths together.

I hope you will continue to work hard to help businesses in Canada and in China seize the opportunities for greater partnership that now lie before us because in the end, we are all served by taking the long view.  I've always believed that the purpose of leadership is to represent the future to the past and to the present.  History has a way of making the most controversial decisions obvious, but that does not diminish the courage of leaders of previous generations.

And now, 45 years down the road, the world is self-evidently better off because they worked so hard to bring China into the global system.

This morning I had the opportunity to hold my daughter's hand along the Great Wall of China.  Let me tell you, when you find yourself walking along a centuries old wall with your seven year-old daughter, the least you can do is think a few decades down the road. Then the answers to the biggest questions become clear.

Do we want a world built on diversity or division? One that prospers by expanding trade and creating growth, or one that makes us all poorer because we've thrown up walls and retreated behind them?  One where we work hard and work together to overcome our differences and build on common ground, or one where we keep our distance from people whose history and culture differ from our own?

Well, we're going through a period of enormous change, my friends, in China, in Canada, and everywhere in between.  No country, no business, indeed, no person will be unaffected.

The question before us is, therefore, whether we engage and actively work to choose and shape and seize our future, or fearfully and passively let it happen around us.  Well, I know that you all are here because you've already answered that question the right way.  It is the choice previous generations would expect of us, and for which our children will be thankful.

We have a lot of work ahead of us, my friends, and I, for one, couldn't be more looking forward to it.

Merci beaucoup, thank you, xiè xie.

Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by acknowledging the hard work done by many of my colleagues.

From my own caucus, I’d like to thank the Members from Surrey-Newton and Winnipeg North for their tireless advocacy. They have petitioned the Canadian government for years to make the apology that will be made today. I thank them for their commitment to this cause.

From the Opposition benches, special mention must be made of the Members from Calgary Heritage, Calgary Midnapore and the former Member for Surrey North. Each deserves recognition for the work they have done to seek resolution for victims and their families.

As do the many organizations that have sought the same, in particular, the Professor Mohan Singh Memorial Foundation.

Mr. Speaker, today I rise in this House to offer an apology on behalf of the Government of Canada, for our role in the Komagata Maru incident.

More than a century ago, a great injustice took place.

On May 23, 1914, a steamship sailed into Burrard Inlet in Vancouver. On board were 376 passengers of Sikh, Muslim and Hindu origin.

Those passengers, like millions of immigrants to Canada since, came seeking better lives for their families. Greater opportunities. A chance to contribute to their new home.

Those passengers chose Canada. And when they arrived here, they were rejected.

They were rejected because in the early years of the last century, the Government of Canada put in place a law that prohibited passengers from disembarking in Canada if the vessel they were on had stopped at any point during its journey here.

This would have prevented immigrants from faraway countries such as India from entering Canada, because in that era, it was impossible to travel great distances by sea without making any stops.

Because of this law, when the Komagata Maru arrived in Canada, only a small number of passengers were allowed to disembark. The ship, and all remaining passengers on it, was ordered to leave.

Members of the local Sikh community tried to convince authorities to reverse their decision, but those efforts were unsuccessful.

And on July 23, 1914 – two months after it arrived – the Komagata Maru was escorted out of harbour by the Canadian military, and forced to return to India, where 19 passengers were killed and many others imprisoned.

Mr. Speaker, Canada does not bear alone the responsibility for every tagic mistake that occurred with the Komagata Maru and its passengers.

But Canada’s government was, without question, responsible for the laws that prevented these passengers from immigrating peacefully and securely.

For that, and for every regrettable consequence that followed, we are sorry.

I apologize, first and foremost, to the victims of the incident.

No words can fully erase the pain and suffering they experienced. Regrettably, the passage of time means that none are alive to hear our apology today.

Still, we offer it, fully and sincerely. 

For our indifference to your plight. 

For our failure to recognize all that you had to offer. 

For the laws that discriminated against you, so senselessly.

And for not formally apologizing sooner.

For all these things, we are truly sorry.

I also wish to apologize to the descendants of the passengers of the Komagata Maru, including those who are here with us here today. 

We can never know what your lives would have been like had your relatives been welcomed to Canada. 

The ways in which your lives would have been different.

The ways in which Canada would have been enriched. 

Those possibilities are lost to history.

For that – and to you – we apologize.

Just as we apologize for past wrongs, so too must we commit ourselves to positive action – to learning from the mistakes of the past, and to making sure that we never repeat them.

That is the unique promise and potential of Canada.

We believe that every person – no matter who they are, no matter where they came from – deserves a real and fair chance at success. Canada’s South Asian community exemplifies this success every day.

We believe that our diversity is a source of strength. That we are strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them.

And we believe in the values enshrined in our Charter of Rights and Freedoms, including multiculturalism. Our government will ensure that these values are always upheld.

Mr. Speaker, before I finish, I would like to acknowledge one more Member who has helped to bring the Komagata Maru incident to our national attention – the Minister of National Defence.

Before entering political life, the Minister was the commanding officer of The British Columbia Regiment Duke of Connaught’s Own – the same regiment that once forced out the Komagata Maru.

A century ago, the Minister’s family might well have been turned away from Canada. Today, the Minister sits beside us, here, in this House.

In a House that includes immigrants. That includes the daughters and sons – the granddaughters and grandsons – of immigrants.

The very makeup of this House should remind all of us that when we have the choice between opening our arms to those in need or closing our hearts to them, we must always choose the more compassionate path.

When we see injustice, we must speak up, and attempt to make things right.

When we make mistakes, we must apologize, and recommit ourselves to doing better.

Mr. Speaker, Canada is a country unlike any other. We are blessed to call it home.

Let us always endeavour to do better, and to be better.

Let us do that in honour of the victims of the Komagata Maru incident, and every courageous person who leaves behind family and familiar things, to bring to Canada the very best of who they are.

Thank you.


Thank you, Secretary General.

I want to thank you personally for your continued leadership on this important issue. It’s safe to say that we would not be here today if it was not for all the hard work that you and President Hollande put into making the Paris Agreement a reality.

On behalf of Canadians and all world citizens, thank you for all you have done.

I’m honoured to be back here at the United Nations, especially today, on Earth Day.

I can’t think of a better place – nor a better day – to add Canada’s signature to the historic Paris Agreement on climate change.

As I said last November in Paris, Canada views climate change not just as a challenge, but as an opportunity.

A chance to build a clean growth economy that will help to fight climate change while creating good, well-paying jobs.

It’s a challenge we’re already embracing.

In the months since Paris, our government has met with our provincial and territorial premiers, as well as Indigenous and municipal leaders.

Together, we’re creating a plan that will help us meet or exceed our emissions targets and encourage clean economic growth.

To encourage actions that will reduce greenhouse gas emissions, we’re investing billions in a low-carbon economy fund.

To get clean technology to market faster, we’re making immediate investments to support clean tech research and development.

And alongside 19 other countries, we’ve signed on to Mission Innovation – a global partnership that aims to double government investment in clean energy innovation over five years, while encouraging private sector leadership in clean energy.

These actions are just the beginning.

We’re not making these investments simply to be nice, although I know Canada does have a reputation to uphold in that department.

We’re making these investments – and we’re following through on our commitments – because it’s the right thing to do. For our environment and our economy, and as part of the global community.

The humanitarian case is clear. We know that it will be the world’s poorest citizens who will be hardest hit by climate change – displaced by rising sea levels, left hungry by failed crops, more vulnerable to disease.

Climate change will make more difficult every other challenge we face – whether it’s ensuring safe and secure food and water or responding to the needs of refugees.

The business case is equally clear. Last year, nearly a third of a trillion dollars was invested globally in renewable power – nearly 50% more than was invested in power from fossil fuels.

That’s a trend that will continue to grow, and it’s one that represents a tremendous opportunity for Canada. One that we cannot – and will not – ignore.

At the same time, Canada’s ambition cannot end with making sure that we alone make the most of a challenging situation. Developing countries have a role to play, too.

They shouldn’t be punished for a problem they didn’t create, nor should they be deprived the opportunities for clean growth that developed nations are now pursuing.

That is why Canada will also invest $2.65 billion over the next five years to help the developing world grow in a cleaner, more sustainable way.

These actions – along with tabling the Paris Agreement in the House of Commons next month and its eventual ratification later this year – confirm Canada’s commitment. Not just to the United Nations, but to each other.

Because it’s only when nations work together that we have any hope of addressing climate change.

It’s only when we work together that we can learn from each other, build on shared knowledge, and develop economies that are as clean as they are competitive.

At the end of the Paris negotiations, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said of the resulting agreement that “what was once unthinkable has now become unstoppable.”

Today, with my signature, I give you our word that Canada’s efforts will not cease.

Climate change will test our intelligence, our compassion and our will. But we are equal to that challenge.

I encourage other signatories to move swiftly to follow through on their commitments, and encourage those countries that are not in a position to sign today to follow shortly.

In every possible sense, we are all in this together.

Together, we can make this a better world. Thank you.


Good afternoon everyone. It’s my absolute pleasure to be here.

You know, when I was asked to be a part of this event, I thought a lot about what I wanted to say.

I thought we could talk about the importance of getting young people engaged in the political process – but I’m pretty sure you know how I feel about that.

Or about how grassroots movements can be amazing catalysts for change – but again, I’m a fairly open book when it comes to that stuff.

Ultimately, I decided that I wanted to talk to you today not as your Prime Minister, but as your Minister of Youth. Which is the portfolio I assigned myself, by the way.

I wanted to take on that extra responsibility because the challenges young people face have always been important to me, whether as a teacher or a volunteer or a politician.  Youth issues are Canada’s issues.  There is no separating the two.  

Now, I know that when people are cynical about politics – both young and old – they tend to have the same complaint. They say that politicians are “all talk and no action.”

Well, this is a lecture and Q&A format.  That means that I’m going to have to do some talking.  But what I want to focus on today are the actions that our government is taking to invest in Canada’s youth.

Specifically, I want to touch on empowering young Canadians, on what we’re doing to help young Canadians get good jobs and work experience, and on the importance of equality and inclusion.

There’s no question that young Canadians are interested in politics.  This room proves it.  And so does the ballot box.

In the last election, Statistics Canada found that 18-24 year olds reported voting at a rate 12 percent higher than the previous election. And that figure could rise even higher next time, if we put in the work needed to help young people feel empowered and engaged.

In the next election in 2019, there will be 1.5 million first-time voters.  We need to make sure that these future voters – now students in high school – are given an active role in the decision-making processes that will fundamentally shape their lives.

So, what does that really mean?  What does it look like in practice?

Well, as Minister of Youth, it will be my job to make sure that Cabinet considers items from the perspective of young Canadians.  And I’ll support my Cabinet colleagues in applying that same lens to the work that their ministry undertakes.

To keep me up to speed on the issues that matter most to young Canadians, I’ll be launching the Youth Advisory Council made up of Canadians aged 16 to 24.

And to make sure that young Canadians think about meaningful careers in government, we will work to modernize the public service. You have so much to give, and your voices and perspectives are needed like never before.

Your goals, your hopes, and your dreams for a better life will inform every decision this government makes.  That is my promise to you.  

When it comes to getting good jobs and work experience, there’s a familiar refrain among young people.  I hear it in every community I visit.  Young people tell me that they can’t get a job because they don’t have any work experience, and they can’t get any work experience because they don’t have a job.

It’s a vicious circle.  And our new government is taking steps to help break it.

We’re establishing an expert panel on youth employment to assess the barriers that vulnerable youth face in finding and keeping jobs.  We need to better understand those challenges.

At the same time, we know that you need help now, not months or years from now.   That’s why last month’s budget included real measures to address youth unemployment and underemployment, and real help for young people seeking their first jobs.

That work starts in the classroom.

To start, we’re investing in actual classrooms. Over the next 3 years, we’ll be investing $2 billion in labs and buildings on college and university campuses.

But perhaps more important, we’re investing in students – so that when young people go off to school, they can afford to stay in school.

In Canada, every young person should have the opportunity to go to university or college. It shouldn’t matter where you were born, or how much money your parents make. We took real steps toward making that a reality with Budget 2016.

We’ll boost Canada Student Grants by up to $1,000 per year for postsecondary students from low and middle income families. This means more money in the pockets of 360,000 students each and every year.

And our budget also includes more help for recent graduates.

Beginning later this fiscal year, no student graduating from college or university will have to start paying back their Canada Student Loans until they are earning at least $25,000 per year. This will help young people as they transition into work, giving them a bit of a break until they land on their feet.

We’ll also support young people through significant new investments in skills training.

Previously, the Government of Canada was spending $330 million per year on youth employment. This year, we will invest almost twice that.

These are just a few of the things we have planned to help students and new workers transition to meaningful, well-paying work.

Investing in young Canadians is a smart bet.  I’m confident of that because I’ve seen what you’re capable of.

I’m reminded almost daily of your unparalleled empathy for others, and of your genuine commitment to equality and inclusion.  I have often said that Canada is a country that is strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them.   

This is true of Canada’s young people, and it is especially true of Indigenous youth.   We have a lot of work to do to make sure that all young people in Canada enjoy equal treatment and equal opportunity.

This work won’t be easy.  Things that matter seldom are.  But I’m confident that if Canada and its Indigenous partners work together on a nation-to-nation basis, we can and we will ensure that Indigenous youth have a strong voice in shaping their futures.

For our part, the government will invest $2.6 billion over the next five years in primary and secondary education on reserves, to help First Nations students learn and succeed.  

Every child deserves a quality education.  Equality and inclusion matters – no matter your background, no matter where you live.  Those are the principles that will guide the decisions we make as a government.

When I look at the students here today, I feel  proud, and confident, and frankly, I feel reassured.

You are the most educated, most connected, and most diverse generation that this country has ever seen.  You shape your communities in ways that couldn’t have been imagined even 20 years ago when I was in school.

I was in the first class at McGill where everyone was given an email address, and it had more numbers in it than my CEGEP math textbook.

But for you, technology is an asset, innovation is second nature, diversity is a source of strength, and collaboration is the expectation.

You are the leaders, not of tomorrow – but of today. Never forget this.

What you do, what you say, and the choices you make have the power to change the world.

Young people have long demanded more from their elected representatives and I’m here to tell you that our government expects no less of you.

We need your help.

Tell us your concerns.

Keep us focused.

And expect more than talk – demand action.

My friends, this is a collaboration.  Together, we’ll create a future that we can be proud of for generations to come.

Thank you.

Mr. President, First Lady, ladies and gentlemen. What an extraordinary honour it is to be here with you tonight.

Thank you so much for the warm welcome you have extended to Canada and the Canadian delegation, and to Sophie and me personally.

Your hospitality, and your friendship, means the world to us.

In thinking about what I wanted to say this evening, I came across a quote from President Truman, who shared these words with the Canadian parliament nearly 70 years ago.

He said that Canada’s relationship with the United States “did not develop spontaneously ... (It) did not come about merely through the happy circumstance of geography,” but was “compounded of one part proximity and nine parts good will and common sense.”

It’s that enduring good will and common sense that I believe defines our relationship to this day.

It’s what makes our constructive partnership possible.

It’s what allows us to respectfully disagree, and remain friends and allies on the few occasions we do  

For example, I would argue that it’s better to be the leader of a country that consistently wins Olympic gold medals in hockey. President Obama would likely disagree.

(To President) And yet you still invite us over for dinner. Because that’s what friends do.

But you know, now that I think of it, we’re actually closer than friends. We’re more like siblings, really. Born of the same parents, though we took different paths in our later years. We became the stay at home type. You grew to be a little more… rebellious.

I think the reason that good will and common sense come so easily is because we are – Canadians and Americans alike – guided by the same core values.

Values like cooperation and respect. Cooperation, because it keeps us safe and prosperous. And respect, because it’s the surest path to both safeguarding the world that we share and honouring the diverse people with whom we share it.

When it comes to security, for example, we agree that our countries are stronger – and the world is safer – when we work together. For more than half a century, we’ve joined forces to protect our continent. And we’ve been the closest of allies overseas for even longer, fighting together on the beaches of France, standing shoulder to shoulder with our European partners in NATO, and  now confronting violent extremism in the Middle East.

In every instance, we realized that our concerns were better addressed together than alone. And together, we have realized the longest, most peaceful, and most mutually beneficial relationship of any two countries since the birth of the nation-state.

It’s a relationship that doesn’t just serve our own interests – it serves the entire world.

Canadians and Americans also value economic interdependence, because we know that it brings greater prosperity to all of us.

Over $2.4 billion worth of goods and services cross the border every day – evidence of one of the largest and most mutually beneficial trading relationships in the world.

One of our most popular exports to the United States has been another Justin – Justin Bieber. Now, this kid’s had a great year. And of course, leave it to a Canadian to reach international fame with a song called “Sorry”.

Together, Canada and the US negotiated trade agreements that have expanded opportunities for our businesses, created millions of good, well-paying jobs for our workers, and made more products more affordable for more Canadian and American families.

We must never take that partnership for granted. I can promise you that my government never will.

Nor should we forget that our responsibilities extend beyond our own borders, and across generations.

That means getting rid of the outdated notion that a healthy environment and a strong economy stand in opposition to each other.

And it means that when it comes to issues like climate change, we need to acknowledge that we are all in this together. Our children and grandchildren will judge us not by the words that we said but by the actions that we took, or failed to take.

If we truly wish to leave to them a better world than the one we inherited from our own parents – and I know, Mr. President, that you and the First Lady want this as strongly as Sophie and I do – we cannot deny the science.  We cannot pretend that climate change is still up for debate.

And that’s why I’m so proud of the continental strategy we’ve negotiated to help take on this most serious challenge. It’s a blueprint for real progress. One that respects science and scientists. That takes meaningful, measurable steps to protect our environment and combat climate change. And it’s a plan that allows us to grow our economies as we do it.

Thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership and your partnership in this.

And finally, we believe – Canadians and Americans – in the fundamental truth that diversity is a source of strength.  That we are thriving and prosperous countries not in spite of our differences, but because of them.

Canadians know this. It’s why communities across the country welcomed more than 25,000 Syrian refugees over the past four months.  Not as visitors or temporary citizens, but as Canadians. And Americans understand this, too.  It’s why each generation has welcomed newcomers seeking liberty and the promise of a better life.

We know that if we seek to be greater, we must do greater things. Be more compassionate. Be more accepting.  Be more open to those who dress differently, or eat different foods, or speak different languages.  Our identities as Canadians and Americans are enriched by these differences, not threatened by them.

On our own, we make progress. But together, we make history. Duty-bound, loyal, and forever linked. Whatever the future holds, we will face it together. Neighbours, friends, partners, and allies. That is our experience, and our example to the world.

Mr. President, thank you for all you have done these past seven years to preserve this most important relationship.  May the special connection between our two countries continue to flourish in the years to come. And may my grey hair come in at a much slower rate than yours has.

And with that, on behalf of 36 million Canadians, I propose a toast: to the President, to the First Lady, and to the people of the United States of America. Cheers.

Hello everyone. I would like to thank the ministers of National Defence, International Development, and Foreign Affairs for joining me here today for this important announcement.


Thank you Professor Schwab for your warm welcome and for bringing this impressive group together.

I’d like to take a moment to recognize a founder of the World Economic Forum and a great Canadian, Maurice Strong, who passed away just a couple months ago.

Maurice showed incredible leadership on a variety of issues facing the world today, and in particular early and compelling leadership on climate change.

Today, we are gathered here to contemplate whether we are in the early stages of a fourth industrial revolution.

What a breathtaking possibility that is.

Steam power changed the world utterly. So did electricity and more recently, computers. And now we may be on the cusp of change equal in magnitude and far swifter in pace.

New technology is always dazzling, but we don’t want technology simply because it is dazzling—we want it, create it and support it because it improves people’s lives.

If we didn’t build the public infrastructure in the early 20th century to support mass electrification only the wealthy would have had heat and running water. And with that, the creation of the middle class—the base of resilient economies—would never have happened.   

Technology needs to serve the cause of human progress, not serve as a substitute for it, or as a distraction from its absence.

Simply put, everybody needs to benefit from growth in order to sustain growth.

It’s not hard to see how the connections between computing, information, robotics, and biotechnologies could deliver spectacular progress. It’s also not hard to imagine how it could produce mass unemployment and greater inequality.

Technology itself will not determine the future we get. Our choices will. Leadership will.

I believe in positive, ambitious leadership. I don’t believe leaders should prey on the anxiety of the disenfranchised.

Leadership should be focused on extending the ladder of opportunity to everyone. On pursuing policies that create growth, and on ensuring that growth produces tangible results for everyone.

Positive leadership creates a virtuous cycle. The more results we achieve for people, the more we grow the middle class, and create real chances for those working hard to join the middle class, the more people will grant you a license for further ambition.   

We need to trust citizens. We need to give people the tools and ability to help them succeed.

The fourth industrial revolution will not be successful unless it creates real opportunity for the billions who weren’t able to join us here this week.

In Canada we get this.

We need education to enable people to learn, think, and adapt.

We need infrastructure that supports change.

We need policies that encourage science, innovation and research.

We need societies that recognize diversity as a source of strength, not a source of weakness.

And we need governments willing to invest in making all that happen, while recognizing the dynamic innovation that happens in the private sector.

Just look at Silicon Valley. It crackles with ideas and experimentation.

Diversity is a major reason for Silicon Valley’s creativity. It’s engineers and entrepreneurs come from all over the world. Each brings a different perspective. And when those diverse ways of seeing and thinking come together, they spark creativity.

Diversity fosters new ideas. New ideas generate the experimentation needed to make the most of the fourth industrial revolution.

And diversity is something leaders can do much about.

Recently, a New York Times reporter asked the president of Y Combinator—  major Silicon Valley startup funder—if any one school stood out as a source of graduates with sparkling new ideas. He said there is one. It is the University of Waterloo.

That’s Canada’s University of Waterloo.

Why does Silicon Valley look to it as a great source of brilliant minds and brilliant ideas?

It has high intellectual standards, of course. And it values entrepreneurship. But diversity is its indispensable ingredient.

Their students come from everywhere. Fully half the graduate engineering students are international.

And the University of Waterloo’s domestic students are drawn from Canada’s student population—one of the most diverse in the world.

Now many of you have reached out to me recently in thanks for Canada’s compassionate response to the Syrian refugee crisis.

But let me tell you something, when I welcomed those families to Toronto last month, I welcomed them as new Canadians and as the future of the Canadian economy.

Diversity isn't just sound social policy. Diversity is the engine of invention.

It generates creativity that enriches the world.

We know this in Canada. Frankly, our recent election reminded us all that people can respond to a positive, inclusive vision of society.

And that makes me profoundly optimistic and confident.

Canada was mostly known for its resources. I want you to know Canadians for our resourcefulness.

I would bet that almost all of you have Canadians in leadership positions in your companies—you may not know it because we don’t often shout it from the rooftops, some clichés about Canadians are true.  In fact, at least half of you have hired Dominic Barton at one point or another.

We have a diverse and creative population, outstanding education and healthcare systems, and advanced infrastructure. We have social stability, financial stability and a government willing to invest in the future.

It’s not a coincidence that Canada is always found at or near the top of lists that countries want to be at or near the top of.

Canada has something else that isn’t so easily quantifiable. Confidence.

Canadians are remarkably confident. We believe in progress. And we are willing to work very, very hard to make it happen.

Our natural resources are important, and they always will be. But Canadians know that what it takes to grow and prosper isn’t just what’s under our feet, it’s what between our ears.  

Our recent election showed that Canadians understand that confident countries invest in their future.  

And these days, it seems the global supply of confidence is dwindling.

Some now say that it is impossible to change the face of global inequality—we’ve gone too far down one road to alter our course and invest in shared prosperity.   

Others insist that climate change is reason to despair. It’s too late to avoid catastrophe, they say. Or the only way to avoid catastrophe is to abandon economic growth.

Still others question diversity. People of different cultures and languages cannot live together harmoniously, they say. Diversity means instability and insecurity. Diversity is dangerous.  

I don’t believe any of that.

We can grow the middle class so that those who study and work hard and save will be rewarded.

We can fight climate change without sacrificing growth and prosperity. In fact, our global push toward a low-carbon economy will produce new companies, new growth, and new prosperity.

And, yes, we can embrace diversity and the new ideas that spring from it, while simultaneously fostering a shared identity and shared values in safe, stable communities that work.

The one thing certain about the next industrial revolution is like the three that preceded it, it will bring enormous change.

If you are looking for a country that has the diversity, the resilience, the positivity and the confidence that will not just manage this change but take advantage of it, there has never been a better time to look to Canada. 

Good morning.

Thank you so much for your kind welcome.

Before I begin, I’d like to recognize the Algonquin Nation, on whose traditional territory we are gathering.  We acknowledge them as the past, present and future caretakers of this land.

Elders, youth, National Chief Bellegarde, members of the AFN executive and Chiefs-in-Assembly: thank you for the opportunity to be here with you today.

When I last joined you, in July of this year, I said that I hoped you’d invite me back, whatever my job title might be.

I’m so glad you took me up on that offer.

As you know, a few things have changed since we last met.  But I’m also struck by the things that endure.

Meeting with Canadians. 

Hearing your stories. 

And through those conversations, getting a better sense of what it is that people are going through.

You can’t be an effective Member of Parliament if you’re not doing those things each and every day.

And, that’s no less true when you’re Prime Minister.

The difference is that as Prime Minister, my government now has the opportunity to take that understanding and transform it into action.  Or as last week’s Throne Speech put it, “make real change happen.” 

One of the ways we will advance that agenda for real change is by making sure that the voices of Indigenous Peoples are heard in Ottawa.

That starts with our new Members of Parliament. 

Of the dozen Indigenous candidates that ran under my party’s banner during the last campaign, eight were elected to office. 

Of those eight, two – Hunter Tootoo from Nunavut and Jody Wilson-Raybould from Vancouver – are now serving as cabinet ministers.

They are joined at the cabinet table by an experienced and capable Minister of Indigenous and Northern Affairs, Carolyn Bennett.  Carolyn is new to that role, but as former Liberal critic for Aboriginal Affairs, she’s not new to the issues that matter to your members. 

But as you’ve heard me say before, it’s not just about individual people, or even individual governments.  What’s needed is nothing less than a total renewal of the relationship between Canada and First Nations Peoples.

During the election, I made a personal commitment to bring new leadership and a new tone to Ottawa.  

I promised Canadians real change.  That includes not just doing different things, but also doing things differently.  Including the way that we, as a government, approach our relationships with others.

History has shown that taking an adversarial approach is not only ineffective – it can be profoundly damaging.

Nowhere is this more obvious than in the government’s relationship with First Nations.

It is time for a renewed, nation-to-nation relationship with First Nations Peoples.

One that understands that the constitutionally guaranteed rights of First Nations in Canada are not an inconvenience but rather a sacred obligation.

One that is based on recognition of rights, respect, co-operation and partnership. 

One that is guided by the spirit and intent of the original treaty relationship; one that respects inherent rights, treaties and jurisdictions; and one that respects the decisions of our courts.

I know that renewing our relationship is an ambitious goal, but I am equally certain that it is one we can, and will, achieve if we work together.

This is a responsibility I take seriously, and I have instructed my government to do the same.

In the mandate letters given to government ministers, my expectations were clear.  I told them that no relationship is more important to me and to Canada than the one with First Nations, the Metis Nation, and Inuit Peoples.

Today, I give you my word that we will renew and respect that relationship.

We will work with you to rebuild trust. 

We will tell the truth. 

When we make mistakes – as all governments do – we will acknowledge our mistakes and learn from them.  

And we will work together with First Nations as full partners, inspired by the values of mutual respect, sharing and caring.

To that end, I’ve given the new Minister of Indigenous and Northern Affairs very explicit directions on how to move forward. 

Among her top priorities will be the creation of a national public inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls in Canada.  

I am pleased to announce that that process is already underway, and an update on our progress will be provided to you by Ministers Bennett, Wilson-Raybould and  Hajdu this afternoon.

We have made this inquiry a priority for our government because those touched by this national tragedy have waited long enough.  The victims deserve justice, their families an opportunity to be heard and to heal.

We must work together to put an end to this ongoing tragedy. 

A second priority will be to make significant investments in First Nations education.  This is one funding area where we know we can’t afford to wait, and we won’t. 

Every child and young person living in Canada deserves a real and fair chance at success.  First Nations students are no less deserving.

At the same time, we will never impose solutions from the top down.  We know this approach is wrong, and we know it doesn’t work.  While we share a commitment to improving education outcomes, we believe that education reforms that affect First Nations children must be led by First Nations.

Third, as National Chief Bellegarde alluded to, our government will immediately – as part of our first budget – lift the two percent cap on funding for First Nations programs.  As you know, that limit has been in place for nearly 20 years.  It hasn’t kept up with the demographic realities of your communities, nor the actual costs of program delivery. 

It’s time for a new fiscal relationship with First Nations that gives your communities sufficient, predictable and sustained funding.  This is a promise we made, and a promise we will keep.

Fourth, and in partnership with Indigenous communities, the provinces, territories and other vital partners, we will fully implement the calls to action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, starting with the implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

And fifth, we will conduct a full review of the legislation unilaterally imposed on Indigenous peoples by the previous government. Where measures are found to be in conflict with your rights, where they are inconsistent with the principles of good governance, or where they simply make no public policy sense, we will rescind them.

These are just five of the commitments we’ve made as part of our efforts to repair this most important relationship. 

There are many other actions we will undertake, from partnering with First Nations as we review and monitor major resource development projects to providing significant new funding to help promote, preserve, and protect Indigenous languages and cultures.

In every instance, we need your help.

We cannot close the gaps between the First Nations experience and those of others without a collaborative, nation-to-nation approach, like the one that resulted in the Kelowna Accord.

As leaders, that is a responsibility we share. 

Working together as partners, I am confident that we can make meaningful and immediate progress on the issues that matter most to your communities – things like education, housing, employment, health and mental health care, community safety, child welfare, and stewardship over our land, water and air.

Doing anything less is simply unacceptable. 

All our communities and all our children deserve the better future I know we can deliver if we work together.

As I said when we last met, a respectful, cooperative partnership is not only possible, it is a sacred responsibility inherited from past generations and entrusted to us by future ones.

I promise you that I will be your partner in the years to come, and hope that you will be mine.

Merci.


I am honoured to represent Canadians at this historic meeting. 

My message is simple. Canada can and will do more to address the global challenge of climate change.

We will do so because the science is indisputable, and tells us that our planet is already changing in ways that will have profound impacts on our future. 

And we will do so because it’s the right thing to do, for our environment and our economy, and as part of the global community.

Our government is making climate change a top priority, and our actions will be based on five principles.

First, we will act based on the best scientific evidence and advice.

Second, we will support and implement policies that contribute to a low-carbon economy, and this will include carbon pricing.

Third, and very importantly, we will work with our provinces, territories, cities and Indigenous leaders who are taking a leadership role on climate change. 

Indigenous peoples have known for thousands of years how to care for our planet. The rest of us have a lot to learn. And no time to waste.

But they are not alone. Canadian cities have also long been leaders in the fight to create clean growth and combat climate change. 

There’s a lot that we, in other orders of government, can learn from our cities.

Fourth, we will help the developing world tackle the challenges of climate change. 

Many of the world’s most vulnerable countries have done little to contribute to the problem, but face the most significant consequences. 

And all countries deserve the right to develop, and this development can and should be based on access to clean energy technologies.

Finally, we view climate change not just as a challenge but as an historic opportunity.

An opportunity to build a sustainable economy, based on clean technology, on green infrastructure, and on green jobs.

We will not sacrifice growth; we will create growth.  

I want to highlight the participation at COP 21 of several provincial and territorial premiers. 

Our provinces have taken a leadership role in Canada with regard to climate change. 

In the months to come, we will develop a pan-Canadian climate change framework, to assist us in  implementing the Paris agreement.

This will include national emissions-reduction targets and, more importantly, a concrete plan to achieve them.

Policy options will be informed by the best economic and scientific evidence. 

These options include carbon pricing, support for energy efficiency, clean electricity and transport, and sustainable buildings and infrastructure. 

Adaptation will be a core focus of our efforts. 

And the plan will be flexible to the circumstances and policy approaches of the provinces and territories. From cap-and-trade to a ban on coal-fired electricity generation. From world leading innovation on carbon capture and storage to a revenue-neutral carbon tax. 

We can learn from and build on these models.

We will also emphasize innovation. 

We will support sectors ranging from energy to forestry to agriculture, as they develop technologies to reduce emissions, create high-quality jobs, and contribute to long-term sustainable economic growth.  

Our plan will build on the efforts of local governments, indigenous organizations, businesses, youth, the academic community, and non-governmental organizations, many of whom will be represented in Paris in the coming days.

Canada will take on a new leadership role internationally.

We will participate in collaborative initiatives, such as Mission Innovation and the Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition and we will seek out opportunities to work bilaterally or multilaterally, beginning with our North American partners.  

We believe climate finance is critical.

Our commitment of 2.65 billion dollars over five years towards initiatives will help developing countries reduce their emissions and adapt to climate change.

These efforts can bring about transformative change through increasing access to energy and poverty alleviation.

A Paris agreement should reflect a new reality.

The world has changed for the better.

Global development has increased at a rapid pace. 

But this means that we are going to need the efforts of those countries that are now in a position to help others reduce their emissions and adapt to climate change.

The agreement also requires a prominent role for the private sector and multilateral institutions to mobilize finance. 

Those who can act, must.

COP 21 provides an opportunity for leaders to overcome old divisions and forge an ambitious, meaningful agreement, and an effective path forward.

Collectively, we are already rising to the task, with more than160 countries representing over 90 percent of global emissions having committed to taking action. 

This is unprecedented. 

But the latest science tells us that we need to do more.

Canada looks forward to playing a constructive role at COP 21.

Our delegates are focussed on finding common ground to achieve an agreement with strong commitments and ambition, one that all parties are able to adopt and implement.

We have an opportunity to make history in Paris - an agreement that supports a transition to a low-carbon economy that is necessary for our collective health, security, and prosperity. 

Canada is back, my good friends. 

We are here to help. 

To build an agreement that will do our children and our grandchildren proud.

Thank you.


Quite a pleasure to be here, in London, with all of you today.

Thank you, High Commissioner Campbell, and all of the staff here at Canada House.

I also want to thank everyone here in the room, and all those joining us outside in the square, for taking the time to be with us today.
Earlier today, I had the opportunity to meet with Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
She was, of course, gracious and insightful, with a unique and valuable perspective. Her Majesty has been an important part of Canada’s history and, I am confident, will remain an important part of our continued progress and our future.

And it’s that future, and Canada’s role in our shared future, that I’d like to address today.

Canada has learned how to be strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them, and going forward, that capacity will be at the heart of both our success, and of what we offer the world.
Our commitment to diversity and inclusion isn’t about Canadians being nice and polite—though of course we are. In fact, this commitment is a powerful and ambitious approach to making Canada, and the world, a better, and safer, place.

Why diversity is important

It’s easy, in a country like Canada, to take diversity for granted. In so many ways, it’s the air we breathe.

We’ve raised generation after generation of children who think nothing of hearing five or six different languages spoken on the playground.

Because it’s 2015, people around the world are noticing the diversity of our Cabinet, and our Parliament. But the diversity of our country is not news.

An MP colleague of mine once told me a story that captures it perfectly. He was doing a parliamentary exchange program in Paris. There were elected representatives from around the world present. He was asked what Canada “looks like.”

He was accompanied by four other colleagues, none of whom except him were born in Canada. Among them were three women and two men. Two Catholics, an Ismaili Muslim, a Jew whose parents had survived the Holocaust, and a gay protestant minister. One was born in France, one in Portugal. Another was born in Argentina. Another in Tanzania.

He pointed to his colleagues and said: “Well, this. This is what Canada looks like.”

One-fifth of Canadians were born elsewhere, and chose to immigrate to Canada. In our largest city, more than half were born outside Canada.

Against that backdrop, the importance of diversity can sometimes be taken for granted. But there is no doubt that we’re a better country—a stronger, more successful country—because of it.

Just consider the words that people use to describe Canada: we’re open, accepting, progressive and prosperous. There is a direct line between each of those attributes and Canada’s success in building a more diverse and inclusive society.

We’re not the only nation that’s tried to do it. 

But what’s made it work so well in Canada is the understanding that our diversity isn’t a challenge to be overcome or a difficulty to be tolerated. 

Rather, it’s a tremendous source of strength.

Canadians understand that diversity is our strength. We know that Canada has succeeded—culturally, politically, economically—because of our diversity, not in spite of it. 

In typical Canadian fashion, we don’t celebrate this success often enough. 

But I would argue that now, more than ever, the world needs us to do just that. 

In the wake of horrific events like the recent attacks in Paris, as we renew our resolve to work with the international community to help prevent such attacks, and as we reaffirm our steadfast participation in the coalition against ISIL, we must also recommit to building a world where diversity and difference are promoted and celebrated.

We know that peace is possible, and that hope beats fear every single time.

How and why Canada does diversity best

Canada’s story proves that diversity and inclusion work. Not just as aspirational values, but as a proven path to peace and prosperity.

It hasn’t always been easy. We have had stumbles along that path.

We need to recognize that for Indigenous Peoples, the Canadian reality has not been—and is not today—easy, equitable or fair. 

We need to acknowledge that our history includes darker moments: the Chinese head tax, the internment of Ukrainian, Japanese, and Italian Canadians during the First and Second World Wars, our turning away boats of Jewish or Punjabi refugees, our own history of slavery.

Canadians look back on these transgressions with regret and shame—as we should.

But our history was also filled with many positive moments.

The Underground Railroad. The Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The Multiculturalism Act. The Official Languages Act. The welcoming of Ismaili Muslims. The freedom for Jews and Sikhs, Hindus and Evangelicals to practice their religion as they choose.

These positive changes can never right historical wrongs. But they can serve to remind us that, in the phrase so beloved of Martin Luther King Jr., “The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice.”

Like many other nations, Canada faces a constant debate between those who would have us restrict, close ranks, and build walls—and those who remind us that we are who we are precisely because we are open diverse and inclusive. 

The last election campaign provides a good example. It was, in part, about whether Canadians still believe in those values. Many had their doubts. 

But let me tell you this. I’m standing here today as Prime Minister of Canada because Canadians rejected the forces that would divide us against ourselves.

But we don’t need a national election to see Canada’s commitment to diversity in action. 

We see it in our communities each and every day.

While a few allow themselves to be overwhelmed by anger and outrage, as a society, cooler heads and warmer hearts ultimately prevail.

Whenever, or wherever, a few seek to threaten those who look, or dress, or pray differently; many others stand up and say: “No. Not here. Not in our community, not to our neighbours.”

Time after time, when intolerance rears its ugly head, Canadians rise up to reject it. We prove—clearly and unflinchingly—that we are better than that.

I’d like to share with you a few very recent examples.

One day after the attacks in Paris, a mosque in Peterborough, Ontario, was set on fire—a suspected hate crime. In response, the community rallied, and raised more than $110,000 in two days to help the Muslim community rebuild. United in faith, members of local Christian and Jewish communities opened their doors—literally opened their doors—to give their Muslim neighbours a place to pray. 

Those are Canadian values.

In Kitchener, Ontario, a Hindu temple was vandalized—its windows smashed by rocks, while the congregation's head preacher attended a vigil for those who died in the Paris attacks. A Muslim group in the Toronto area started a fundraiser to help repair the damage.

Those are Canadian values.

The importance of a strong middle class

As important as these values are, they cannot exist in isolation. It’s essential that they are supported by economic policies that benefit Canadians.

Canada’s economy depends on a strong and growing middle class. This has always been the case.

In the last century, Canada’s growing and optimistic middle class created a big-hearted, broad-minded consensus. Together, these hard-working Canadians built a better country, not just for themselves, but for their children, and for each other.

By keeping our focus squarely on helping the middle class and all those who are working hard to join it, we can deliver real economic growth that will benefit all.

That’s a worthwhile goal in its own right, but it’s also important because we know that a diverse country doesn’t work without it.

When opportunities are limited, when people don’t think they have a real and fair chance to succeed, fear eats away at hope. Economic stress manifests itself in many ways. Fear and mistrust of others who are different is one of its most common, most dangerous, expressions.

In other words, middle class growth is much more than an economic imperative—it’s central to our unity as a nation.

It’s that shared sense of purpose that’s so hard to define but so deeply felt. The feeling that we are all in this together. The knowledge that wherever we came from, we are united not only in our struggles, but also in our dreams.

It is the middle class that unites us, and it’s our diverse communities that keep our economy growing. We need both to succeed.

Canada’s role in the world

Providing greater support to our middle class is an important domestic objective, but there is also a critical role for Canada to play in sharing its success with the world.

As the century unfolds, and as economic and environmental trends make migration between states the “new normal,” more and more countries will find themselves faced with challenges that Canada confronted long ago.We’ve

We’ve gotten an important thing right in Canada. Not perfect, but right. That thing is the balance between individual freedom and collective identity.

We know that people are defined in large part by our relationships to other people. Our cultural background, our gender, our religious beliefs, our sexual orientation.

However, we also believe that all of those collective associations receive their highest expression in the form of real, flesh and blood, individual human beings.

We expand cultural freedom by ensuring that individual Canadians who come from these diverse communities have the freedom to live and express and grow and change their cultures.

We refuse to see a contradiction between individual liberty and collective identity. In fact, we have created a society where both thrive, and mutually reinforce one another.

It was at its root, a leap of faith, and a very new idea. Over time, we learned to trust that whatever their culture of origin, the more people engage with the breadth of our country’s diversity, the more Canadian they will become.

Where there was repression, it would be defeated by the more compelling Canadian opportunity to achieve liberty. Where there was isolation, we would meet it with openness and inclusion.

It may have started as a leap of faith, but it has become a defining characteristic of our country, our great success, and arguably our greatest contribution to the world.

We have proven that a country—an astonishingly successful country—can be built on the principle of mutual respect.

In characteristically Canadian fashion, we don’t celebrate this success often enough. But the world needs us to do so. Especially now.One of the most difficult and urgent global problems is how to develop societies where people of different cultures can live together and build common ground. And collectively, we face the influx of refugees fleeing a violent conflict.

One of the most difficult and urgent global problems is how to develop societies where people of different cultures can live together and build common ground. And collectively, we face the influx of refugees fleeing a violent conflict.

Yesterday, our government laid out a plan that would see 25,000 Syrian refugees approved for resettlement by the end of the year, with all expected to arrive in Canada within a few months.

We’ve done it before. Under Prime Minister Joe Clark in the late 1970s and early 1980s, Canada resettled nearly 60,000 refugees from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.

We’ve done it before, and we will do it again, because we know that we are not just resettling refugees, we are welcoming new Canadians.

And more, Canada can also export the ideas and institutions that make diversity work so well at home.

We know how to govern in a way that is inclusive, transparent, respectful and effective. We can share that expertise with other countries and their citizens. 

We know how to work cooperatively with our allies to combat terrorism, and how to be an effective partner in international peace operations. We can contribute more to those international efforts, and have committed to do so.

And we know how to do what former UN Secretary General Annan called for in 2013: “learn from each other, (and make) our different traditions and cultures a source of harmony and strength, not discord and weakness.” 

We have a responsibility—to ourselves and to the world—to show that inclusive diversity is a strength, and a force that can vanquish intolerance, radicalism and hate.

Canada’s success as a diverse and inclusive nation didn’t happen by accident, and won’t continue without effort.

The future is never certain. It depends on the choices we make today.

Compassion, acceptance, and trust; diversity and inclusion—these are the things that have made Canada strong and free. Not just in principle, but in practice.

Those of us who benefit from the many blessings of Canada’s diversity need to be strong and confident custodians of its character.

Let us not close our hearts to those in need, nor our minds to the knowledge that better is always possible.

We are, after all, Canadian.

Let’s show the world the very best of what that means.

Thank you.
>>>>>>> f2c0f21898aed8df0a787dc5e808d408ed739557
