It is with deep sadness that I learned of the deadly terrorist attack on a nightclub in Istanbul that killed and injured innocent people celebrating the New Year and claimed the life of a Canadian citizen.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the families and friends of all of the victims of this horrible act, and we hope and pray that those injured have a rapid and complete recovery.
We mourn with the people of Turkey today and with all countries who lost citizens in this vicious attack.
We also grieve the senseless loss of a Canadian citizen and remain steadfast in our determination to work? with allies and partners to fight terrorism and hold perpetrators to account.

This week, Orthodox Christians in Canada and around the world will celebrate Christmas.
This joyful time of year is an opportunity to gather with family and friends to reflect on the many blessings in our lives. It also gives us a chance to reaffirm our commitment to live in a peaceful, inclusive society.
This year marks our nation’s 150th anniversary. Openness and acceptance are at the heart of what it means to be Canadian, and we should take every opportunity we can to celebrate the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.
Let us also use this occasion to show greater compassion and humanity to those most vulnerable, at home and around the world.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish you and your family a merry Christmas, and health and happiness in the year ahead.

It is with great sadness that I learned of the death of former Portuguese Prime Minister and President Mario Soares.
For more than 50 years, Mr. Soares tirelessly served the Portuguese people. He will be remembered as a figure who, as an activist and political leader, played a central role in bringing democracy back to Portugal and later, as a statesman, became a leader in Europe and on the world stage.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of Mr. Soares, and to the Portuguese people. His legacy as one of the builders of modern Portugal will not be forgotten.

Today, Tamils in Canada and around the world will gather to celebrate Thai Pongal.
This festival marks the end of the harvest season and the start of the new year. Friends and families will come together to give thanks for a prosperous harvest and a season of good fortune. It is a time for joy, celebration, and community.
In 2016, the House of Commons voted unanimously to recognize every January as Tamil Heritage Month. I encourage everybody to reflect on the strong heritage of Canada’s Tamil community. Our nation is stronger and richer because of the contributions of Tamil-Canadians.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating Thai Pongal a joyful festival. 


Today, we pay tribute to Raoul Wallenberg, a remarkable hero and humanitarian who saved tens of thousands of Hungarian Jews from almost certain death in Nazi extermination camps.
As a Swedish diplomat in Nazi-occupied Hungary, Mr. Wallenberg issued a special ‘protective passport’ to Jews, the Schutz-Pass, which identified its bearers as Swedish subjects and conferred some protection on them. He distributed these passports indiscriminately, saving tens of thousands of Jews from deportation.
He also created a network of safe havens operating under the Swedish flag. These safe houses, hospitals, child care centres, and soup kitchens offered shelter to those fleeing persecution and protected many Schutz-Pass holders and other Jews. He helped diplomats from other neutral powers – such as Switzerland and the Vatican – to do the same, protecting even more lives.
Over the course of six months, Mr. Wallenberg’s heroism and ingenuity saved more Jews from the horrors of the Holocaust than any single organization or government.
Tragically, Mr. Wallenberg disappeared after being captured by Soviet forces near the end of the war. Although his fate remains unknown, his legacy lives on through the many awards, monuments, institutions, forests, and anti-racism campaigns that bear his name.
In 2001, the Government of Canada designated January 17 as Raoul Wallenberg Day to honour Canada’s first honorary citizen, and to mark the day he disappeared in 1945.
Today, I encourage all Canadians to celebrate the courage and compassion of Mr. Wallenberg. He demonstrated the best of humanity, and showed that it only takes one individual to change the world for the better. May his life and legacy inspire us all.


On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to extend my congratulations to Donald J. Trump on his inauguration as 45th President of the United States of America.
Canada and the United States have built one of the closest relationships between any two countries in the world. This enduring partnership is essential to our shared prosperity and security.
Together, we benefit from robust trade and investment ties, and integrated economies, that support millions of Canadian and American jobs. We both want to build economies where the middle class, and those working hard to join it, have a fair shot at success.
Canada and the United States have unparalleled cooperation on matters of national security, and have always worked side by side to protect our citizens and ensure our shared border is secure.
We look forward to working with President Trump, the U.S. Administration, the 115th Congress, and officials at the state and local levels to restore prosperity to the middle class on both sides of the border, and to create a safer and more peaceful world.

One year ago in La Loche, Saskatchewan, four Canadians were senselessly killed and seven more were injured. On this tragic anniversary, our thoughts are with the victims, their loved ones, and all those whose lives were forever changed that day.
Over the past year, the people of La Loche have inspired an entire country with their resilience, determination to rebuild, and optimism for a better future. Our government is working every day to help realize that future, and we will continue to partner with the community, Indigenous Peoples, and all orders of government to address the issues facing La Loche.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I join all Canadians in solemn commemoration of this anniversary. To the community of La Loche, please accept our deepest sympathies and know that you have our unwavering support.

I want to thank all Parliamentary Secretaries who have served our government and the Canadian people during our first 14 months in office. At the same time, I am delighted to announce 34 parliamentary secretaries who will work with their respective cabinet ministers to deliver real results for Canadians. This team’s talent, dedication, and breadth of experience will prove invaluable as we pursue our plan to rebuild and strengthen Canada’s middle class, and deliver long-term economic growth that is felt by all Canadians.
The parliamentary secretaries involved in today’s announcement are either newly appointed, staying in their current portfolio, or taking on new responsibilities. Parliamentary Secretaries will resume or take on their duties on January 30, 2017, as will Andrew Leslie, who was recently appointed as Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Foreign Affairs (Canada-U.S. Relations).
I am also pleased to announce the appointment of Filomena Tassi as the Deputy Government Whip, effective January 30, 2017. Ms. Tassi will join Chief Government Whip Pablo Rodriguez in helping implement the priorities of the Government of Canada in Parliament.
Each of these individuals, from a variety of backgrounds and communities across Canada, bring their own skills and points of view to government. I am confident they will complement our current cabinet strengths and help build an even better future for all Canadians.
Today, on the 72nd anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau, we remember the more than six million Jews murdered during the Holocaust and the countless other victims of Nazi brutality.
The Holocaust serves as a tragic reminder of the horrors that can be born of racism and hate. We must always remember those who experienced the worst of humanity – in ghettos, cattle cars, and Nazi death camps – and never forget our collective responsibility to prevent the seeds of intolerance and hate from taking root in our communities, country, and world.
As we take time today to reflect on the haunting legacy of the Holocaust, let us pay tribute to the strength and spirit of the Jewish people and the many others who persevered during one of the darkest periods of human history.
Today, and every day, we reaffirm our commitment to stand against anti-Semitism, xenophobia, and prejudice in all its forms. It is through this commitment that we remember those we have lost and honour those whose stories must never be forgotten.
In the days ahead, the Vietnamese community in Canada and around the world will mark T?t Nguyên Ðán, the Lunar New Year, and welcome the arrival of the year of the Rooster, which in 2017 is also known as the year of the Fire Rooster.
As family and friends get together and share special meals, T?t Nguyên Ðán is an occasion to reflect on the past year and celebrate the arrival of spring.
This year, as we celebrate our country’s 150th anniversary, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Vietnamese Canadians have made enormous contributions to Canada and have helped make it the strong and diverse place it is today.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those marking this occasion a very happy New Year.
Today, Chinese Canadians will begin several days of celebrations for the New Year when they honour the beginning of the year of the Rooster, which in 2017 is also known as the year of the Fire Rooster.
During this special time, friends and families will join together to celebrate their hopes for a prosperous year to come. Celebrations are marked throughout Canada with many traditions including feasts and parades.
This year, as we celebrate our country’s 150th anniversary, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Chinese Canadians have made enormous contributions to Canada and have helped make it the strong and diverse place it is today.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those marking this occasion a very happy New Year.
This week, Korean communities in Canada and around the world will celebrate Seollal and welcome the arrival of the year of the Rooster.
Seollal is the most important traditional Korean holiday. This joyful time is an opportunity to reflect on the year that has passed, recognize good fortune, and look to the year ahead with hope and optimism.
To usher in the Korean New Year, family and friends will gather to celebrate, pay their respects to their elders and ancestors, and enjoy traditional feasts.
This year, as we celebrate our country’s 150th anniversary, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Korean Canadians have made enormous contributions to Canada and have helped make it the strong and diverse place it is today.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating Seollal health, peace, and success.
It was with tremendous shock, sadness and anger that I heard of this evening’s tragic and fatal shooting at the Centre culturel islamique de Québec located in the Ste-Foy neighbourhood of the city of Québec.
We condemn this terrorist attack on Muslims in a centre of worship and refuge.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of all those who have died, and we wish a speedy recovery to those who have been injured.
While authorities are still investigating and details continue to be confirmed, it is heart-wrenching to see such senseless violence. Diversity is our strength, and religious tolerance is a value that we, as Canadians, hold dear.
Muslim-Canadians are an important part of our national fabric, and these senseless acts have no place in our communities, cities and country. Canadian law enforcement agencies will protect the rights of all Canadians, and will make every effort to apprehend the perpetrators of this act and all acts of intolerance.
Tonight, we grieve with the people of Ste-Foy and all Canadians.

Throughout our history, Black Canadians have played a key role in building and shaping the diverse, compassionate, and prosperous country that we are all so proud to call home. 
Every February, Canadians celebrate Black History Month by acknowledging the remarkable achievements and contributions that Canadians of African and Caribbean descent have made to Canada.  
I urge all Canadians to reflect on the bravery and courage of individuals like Viola Desmond, a prominent Black Canadian businesswoman who changed the course of Canadian history by defiantly refusing to leave a whites-only area of a movie theatre in 1946.
In recognition of her impact on the civil rights and freedoms movement in Canada, the Government of Canada chose Viola Desmond as the face of Canada’s ten dollar bank note.
This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us never forget the stories of Black Canadians’ courage in the face of intolerance. Diversity is our greatest strength, and we must always continue to build a country that affords equality and opportunity for all.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to participate in the many events that will take place across the country throughout February.
Together, let us celebrate the heritage of Black Canadians, and honour the integral role they have played in shaping our democratic and free society.
On this day, 40 years ago, Canada became a Dialogue Partner of ASEAN.
As a Pacific nation, Canada has strongly supported ASEAN’s goal of maintaining the peace, stability, and security that have allowed Southeast Asia – and the wider Asia-Pacific region – to develop and prosper.
The ties between Canadians and the peoples of Southeast Asia have never been stronger. Canada, after all, is home to over one million people from Southeast Asia. Their communities enrich our national fabric every day, and greatly contribute to one of our country’s most fundamental strengths: our diversity. We also have strong economic links to ASEAN, with over $21 billion in two-way merchandise trade in 2015.
In recent years, we have deepened our partnership with ASEAN by expanding our resident diplomatic footprint to all ten member states, appointing a dedicated ambassador to ASEAN, and supporting many initiatives that have promoted peace and prosperity throughout the region.
Canada’s engagement with ASEAN will continue to grow as we work together to create a better, safer, and more prosperous world.
Today, as we celebrate 40 years of partnership with ASEAN, I encourage all Canadians to reflect on the tremendous contributions made by Southeast Asian Canadians to our country.
Canada’s international development workers and volunteers are selfless, generous, and dedicated individuals who work tirelessly – here at home and around the world – to improve the lives of millions of people.
During International Development Week, I encourage all Canadians to celebrate – and to learn about – those who do so much to build a more just and compassionate world.
This year’s theme – Leave no one behind: Canada contributes to global goals! – highlights our collective efforts to achieve the goals laid out in the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Canada will continue to show global leadership in bringing people together to help achieve lasting progress.
Over the past year, we have consulted Canadians and our international partners in order to craft a new approach to international assistance. Our refocused efforts will help the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people, including by promoting human rights, women’s empowerment and gender equality, and respect for diversity and inclusion.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to join me in thanking our international development workers and partners for their commitment to building a better world.
This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us reflect on the achievements the maple leaf flag represents: the hard work that has built this country, the sacrifices made by so many to keep it free, and the hard-won victories to ensure that compassion and diversity remain the cornerstones of our democracy.
Few national symbols are as iconic as the maple leaf. Beavers and canoes may be just as enduring, but only the maple leaf has come to represent unity, hope, generosity, openness, and respect – and the nation and its people who live up to those values every day. It is fitting that this cherished symbol is at the heart of Canada’s flag.
Today, I invite all Canadians to reflect on what the maple leaf flag means to them, what it stands for around the world, and how it has helped shape our national identity. I also invite you to take part in Canadian Heritage’s Share your moment with the flag challenge and celebrate one of our greatest national symbols.

It is with sadness that I learned of the death of René Préval, a two-term president of Haiti.
Mr. Préval was first elected as President in 1996. He left office in 2001, becoming Haiti’s first elected president to serve a full term, before returning to the presidency for another full term in 2006.
Canada will remember his commitment to democracy as we continue to support Haiti’s development, and work with the Haitian people to address the economic and humanitarian challenges facing their country.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I offer our condolences to Mr. Préval’s family and friends, and to the Haitian people.

Today, we join people all over the globe to celebrate the remarkable achievements that women have made everywhere, and reaffirm our commitment to gender equality worldwide.
This year, Canada’s theme for International Women’s Day is #EqualityMatters, which reminds us that society is better – more prosperous, peaceful, secure, and cohesive – when women’s rights are respected, when women are valued and empowered, and when they lead the way in our communities.
While we have taken significant steps toward gender equality, we know that much more work needs to be done. Women around the world continue to receive lower pay and fewer promotions. They are denied legal control over their bodies and reproductive health. They face much higher rates of harassment and verbal, physical, and sexual abuse. In impoverished communities, women are the least likely to have access to healthcare, the last ones to eat, and the most vulnerable to the hardships brought on by disease.
That is why we will continue to place gender equality and rights, and the empowerment of women and girls, at the heart of our international development work. These efforts received a considerable boost this morning with the announcement that Canada will provide $650 million in funding to address gaps in sexual and reproductive health and rights in the world’s poorest and most vulnerable communities.
Today, I remind Canadians that we all have a role to play in the fight for gender equality, and that we all benefit from a more gender equal world. Women and men, girls and boys, we must all step up and speak out, because half of the population cannot solve a problem that affects us all.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to join us in celebrating International Women’s Day, as we renew our commitment to a more positive, just, and equal world.

Tomorrow at sunset, Jewish communities in Canada and around the world will join together to celebrate Purim.
Purim is a joyous holiday where loved ones wear costumes, exchange gifts, give to charity, and partake in traditional feasts.
During this time, friends and family will come together to read the Megillah, which tells the story of how Queen Esther and her uncle Mordecai saved the Jewish people from persecution in ancient Persia.
We honour this celebration of triumph over persecution and oppression as both a testament to the resilience, bravery, and joy of the Jewish people, and as a reaffirmation of our responsibility to stand against anti-Semitism, xenophobia, and prejudice. The government denounces recent acts of anti-Semitism, and other acts of religious intolerance, in the strongest terms. We cannot – and will not – tolerate any expressions of hatred and discrimination in our communities.
On behalf of all Canadians and our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a joyous Purim.
Chag Purim Sameach!

Today, the citizens of the Commonwealth of Nations honour the common ties and shared values that unite all 52 member countries.
Headed by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, the Commonwealth family spans Africa, Asia, the Americas, Europe, and the Pacific; it includes more than two billion people, and many different backgrounds, cultures, and languages. This year’s theme – ‘A peace-building Commonwealth’ – reminds us that diversity and inclusion form a proven path to peace and prosperity.
The Commonwealth is a champion of democracy, freedom, sustainable development, the rule of law, and human rights, especially the rights of women and girls. As a member of the Commonwealth, Canada remains committed to protecting and promoting these values.
I invite all Canadians to use today as an opportunity to learn more about the shared history and values that bind the peoples of the Commonwealth.
This week, Canadians of the Hindu faith will celebrate Holi, also known as the Festival of Colours.
This festival marks the end of winter and the beginning of spring. It is an opportunity to celebrate peace, renew friendships, and look forward to new beginnings with optimism and joy. It is also a time to reflect on the traditional notions of good and evil, and the ultimate triumph of light over darkness. Holi is celebrated by Hindus and non-Hindus alike across Canada, South Asia, and around the world.
To mark this happy occasion, family and loved ones gather to sing, dance, eat delicacies, light bonfires, and paint each other with brightly coloured powders and dyes.
This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Canadians of the Hindu faith have made enormous contributions to Canada and have helped make it the strong and diverse country it is today.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating Holi a fun, joyous, and colourful festival.
Today, we join Persian, Central Asian, Kurdish, and Ismaili Canadians to celebrate the festival of Nowruz.
This ancient festival has been observed for thousands of years to welcome the coming of spring and the New Year in the Persian calendar. It is a time for friends and family to join together at the haft-seen table – displaying seven items symbolizing the blessings of life – to exchange gifts, enjoy music, and share food. Nowruz, which means new day in Farsi, is also an opportunity to renew our collective commitment to harmony, acceptance, and understanding.
This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I invite all Canadians to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada the vibrant and inclusive place it is today. Let us take this time to recognize and celebrate the contributions of Persian, Central Asian, Kurdish, and Ismaili Canadians across the country.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish a healthy and prosperous new year to all those celebrating Nowruz in Canada and around the world.
On the International Day of La Francophonie, we join Francophones in Canada and around the world to celebrate the French language and francophone culture.
Throughout our history, Francophones have helped make Canada a dynamic, inclusive and open country. Today, we celebrate the many contributions of this community, which has played and continues to play a central role in building Canada, as well as the values that unite us such as cooperation, solidarity and democracy.
This day is also an opportunity to pay tribute to the deep ties we share with the global Francophone community. Canada is committed to continue building a better world by promoting the values we hold dear, including peace, diversity and respect for human rights.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I extend my best wishes to everyone around the world celebrating the International Day of La Francophonie.
Today, we come together to recognize the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Whether here in Canada or around the world, racism devalues individuals, divides communities, and breeds fear and animosity throughout society.
In Canada, diversity is a source of strength and a fundamental pillar of our country’s success. While we have made important progress in the fight against racism and racial discrimination in recent decades, much work still needs to be done. Far too many people around the world continue to be denied their most basic human rights simply because of the colour of their skin or their ethnic background.
The Government of Canada strongly condemns any form of discrimination at home and in our global community. We will continue to promote inclusiveness, acceptance, and equality in Canada and around the globe, and will never stop working for a safer, more equal, and more respectful world.  
On this important day, we reaffirm our ongoing responsibility to speak out against racism, hate, xenophobia, and bigotry in all its forms. Silence is not an option because progress is never permanent.

We strongly condemn today’s attack in London. I was shocked and saddened to learn of the innocent people who were killed and injured as a result of this cowardly attack.
Canada and the U.K. are the closest of friends and allies. Our friendship is based on shared values and history – indeed, Canada’s Parliament is a descendant of the Chamber targeted this morning.
Today’s attack on the U.K. Parliament is an attack on democracies around the world.
The Canadian Parliament withstood a similar attack not so long ago by those who sought to instil fear and divide Canadians against themselves. Instead, Canadians came together. I am confident the British people will do the same, and will emerge from their grief stronger and more united than ever before.
On behalf of all Canadians, I offer our full support to Prime Minister May and to the people of the United Kingdom. We stand ready to offer all possible assistance to the British government, to do what we can to bring to justice those responsible for this heinous act.
Canadians stand united with the British people in the fight against terrorism. We will continue to work together with the U.K. and all our allies to show the world that freedom and democracy will always triumph.

The Honourable Judy Foote is taking a leave of absence from her position as Minister of Public Services and Procurement. She will be away until further notice for personal and family reasons. As Parliamentarians, our family should always be our priority, and I commend her for taking the time to be with her loved ones. We look forward to having her back in Ottawa.
During her leave of absence, her ministerial duties will be performed by the Honorable Jim Carr who will serve as acting Minister of Public Services and Procurement, in addition to being Minister of Natural Resources.

Canada fully supports the United States’ limited and focused action to degrade the Assad regime’s ability to launch chemical weapons attacks against innocent civilians, including many children. President Assad’s use of chemical weapons and the crimes the Syrian regime has committed against its own people cannot be ignored. These gruesome attacks cannot be permitted to continue with impunity.
This week’s attack in southern Idlib and the suffering of Syrians is a war crime and is unacceptable. Canada condemns all uses of chemical weapons.
Canada will continue to support diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis in Syria.

Canada strongly condemns the apparent terrorist attack in Stockholm today, which killed and injured many innocent people.
Sophie and I join all Canadians in offering our deepest condolences to the families and friends of those killed in this cowardly attack. We also hope and pray for a speedy recovery for all those wounded.
Canada grieves with our Swedish friends in this difficult time and we offer all possible assistance.
We will continue working with our international partners and allies, including Sweden, to fight terrorism and help prevent these senseless acts.

Today, we celebrate the founding of the World Health Organization (WHO), and highlight our shared global responsibility to promote better health.
This year, the campaign for World Health Day – Depression: let’s talk – is focused on how depression affects people of all ages, from all walks of life, all around the world.
One in three Canadians will experience a mental illness during their lifetime, but these serious health problems are not always visible. By talking about depression and mental health openly and honestly, we can help end the stigma that too often acts as a barrier for those who want and need help.
This year’s World Health Day reminds us that there can be no health without mental health. That is why, working with provinces and territories, we have committed $5 billion over the next ten years to support mental health initiatives, so that more Canadians can get the help they need.
The Government of Canada will continue to help communities address their unique mental health challenges and to work together with the WHO to promote mental health and our collective well-being.
Today, I encourage all Canadians to join the international community to celebrate World Health Day and to raise awareness about depression. We all have a role to play to create more open conversations about mental health, and to help each other get the care we need.
One hundred years ago, on a gentle slope in France, the four divisions of the Canadian Corps fought for the first time as one. They were ordinary – yet extraordinary – men, from all corners of the country: Francophone, Anglophone, new Canadians, Indigenous Peoples.
On Easter Monday, April 1917, battling through snow, sleet, and constant machine gun fire, they broke through an impregnable fortress and achieved a historic victory. They succeeded where other armies had failed – but at a great cost. Nearly 3,600 Canadians lost their lives. Over 7,000 more were wounded. The Battle of Vimy Ridge remains one of the bloodiest battles in Canada’s history.
Despite these losses, Canadian bravery and ingenuity won the day and led to one of the most decisive victories in the First World War. The innovative fighting techniques used so effectively by our soldiers at Vimy Ridge would contribute to the final Allied victory a year and a half later.
Many of the soldiers wearing the Canadian uniform that day were immigrants to this country. People of many languages and backgrounds, representing every region in Canada, fought for the values we hold so dear: freedom, democracy, and peace. In the words of one veteran: ‘We went up Vimy Ridge as Albertans and Nova Scotians. We came down as Canadians.’
Today, as we gather to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge, we remember the thousands of Canadians who gave their lives far from Canada’s shores. We pay tribute to the 100th anniversary of a pivotal battle that has left an indelible mark on our history. And we thank every Canadian who has answered the call to serve for their selflessness and sacrifice. 
Lest we forget.
I am shocked and saddened that so many people were killed in today’s bombings in Egypt at St. George’s Church in Tanta and St. Mark’s Cathedral in Alexandria.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the families and friends of the victims of these heinous acts. Our thoughts and prayers are with all those affected, and we hope and pray that those injured have a complete and rapid recovery.
Today’s senseless attacks targeted churchgoers attending Palm Sunday services, which mark the Sunday before Easter and the start of Holy Week for Christians. Let us remember that the palm branches used in services around the world today are a symbol of peace.
Canada stands shoulder-to-shoulder with Egypt and the Egyptian people, and we offer our full assistance to the Government of Egypt in this difficult time.
Far too often, religious groups around the world suffer persecution and discrimination at the hands of violent extremists. Canada strongly condemns these cowardly acts of terrorism. As an international community, we must stand united in our efforts to stop those responsible and to fight against hate by embracing the values of diversity, inclusion and peace.

Tonight at sundown, Jewish communities across Canada and around the world will observe the beginning of Passover.
The eight-day festival celebrates the liberation of the Israelites from slavery in ancient Egypt. It is a time to reaffirm our commitment to face fear with hope, to choose unity over division, and to have faith in the better days that lie ahead.
The Passover story of redemption – of a people’s triumph over even the deepest bondage and oppression – reminds us to look to each other for strength and hope.
Today, we celebrate the strength and perseverance of the Jewish people, who have survived and triumphed over unspeakable persecution. We reaffirm our commitment to stand against anti-Semitism and other forms of hatred and discrimination, and to work together to make our world a better place for all.
This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Jewish Canadians have made enormous contributions to Canada and have helped make it the strong and diverse country it is today.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I offer our best wishes to all those observing Passover in Canada and around the world. 
Chag Pesach Sameach!
This week, Sikhs in Canada and around the world will celebrate Vaisakhi, a festival that marks the most important date in the Sikh faith.
Vaisakhi celebrates the founding in 1699 of the Khalsa – the community of baptized Sikhs – by Guru Gobind Singh Ji. Family and friends will gather to pray at Gurdwaras and to participate in Khalsa Day parades.
Next week, we will mark the 35th anniversary of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Just as the creation of the Khalsa defines Sikhism, the Charter defines our country. It defends our individual rights and freedoms and, for Canadians of Sikh faith, ensures the Five Ks are protected.
This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Canada is proud to be home to one of the largest Sikh populations in the world. Sikh Canadians help make Canada the strong and diverse country it is today.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating a joyful Vaisakhi.
Waheguru Ji Ka Khalsa, Waheguru Ji Ki Fateh.

Today, Tamils in Canada and around the world will welcome the New Year, known as Puthandu.
On this occasion, families and friends will come together to feast, celebrate, and visit holy sites in a spirit of hope and optimism for the year to come.
This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Our country is stronger and richer because of the contributions of Tamil Canadians.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a peaceful, joyous and healthy New Year.
Iniya Tamizh Puthandu Nalvazhthukkal.

This weekend, millions of Canadians and people around the world will gather with friends and family to celebrate the Easter holiday. This year is special, as Christians in both the Eastern and Western churches are celebrating Easter on the same day.
Easter, also known as Pascha, is a sacred time of year in the Christian tradition, and celebrates Jesus Christ’s resurrection and triumph over death.
The Easter story reminds us of the sacrifices made for us, and of the forgiving power of compassion. It is also a call to hope, especially when hope feels most impossible.
This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Christian Canadians of all backgrounds help make Canada the strong, diverse, and inclusive country it is today.
As we gather with those most important to us, let us put into practice what it truly means to love our neighbours as ourselves, and do what we can to make the world a more just, compassionate, and peaceful place for all.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a blessed and joyful Easter. We hope all Canadians, no matter their faith, find this a time of renewal and promise.

For the past 35 years, the Charter has helped build a country where people from all over the world can come together as equals and create opportunities for one another.
The Charter protects the rights and freedoms that are essential to our identity as Canadians. It allows us to express ourselves as individuals and to celebrate our differences, while bringing us closer as a country.
This year, we also mark the 35th anniversary of Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, which recognizes and affirms Aboriginal and treaty rights. There is no relationship more important to our government than the one with Indigenous Peoples. We are committed to a renewed nation-to-nation, Inuit-to-Crown, and government-to-government relationship based on recognition of rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership.
The spirit and substance of the Charter are at the heart of Canada’s success, and should inspire us all as we work toward a fairer, more just and compassionate society.
Today, I remind Canadians that we have no task greater than to stand on guard for one another’s liberties. The words enshrined in the Charter are our rights, freedoms, and – above all – our collective responsibility.  

Today, Canadians join people across the Commonwealth and around the world to celebrate the 91st birthday of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada.
For 65 years, Her Majesty has served the Commonwealth and its people with grace, strength, and devotion. Earlier this year, we were honoured to celebrate Her Majesty’s Sapphire Jubilee. She is Canada’s first monarch to celebrate 65 years on the throne.
Over the years, Her Majesty has been a constant presence in the life of Canada. She has undertaken 22 official tours to our country and served as the patron of numerous charities, initiatives, and military units.
Today, we pay tribute to Her Majesty’s enduring service to the Commonwealth and its people. May her dedication and sense of duty inspire us all.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish Her Majesty a very happy birthday and continued health and happiness in the years to come.
Today, we join the global community to celebrate Earth Day – a time to connect with nature and reaffirm our commitment to build a cleaner, more sustainable world for our children.
As Canadians, we have a responsibility to safeguard our planet and natural treasures. I am proud of the steps our Government has taken to protect the environment and promote clean growth. These steps include historic domestic and international agreements that will help us respond to pressing environmental challenges, grow the economy, and build a cleaner, healthier tomorrow.
On Earth Day, we recognize Indigenous cultures that have long understood the intricate links that exist between land, water, air, and all living things. Ensuring that decisions today serve generations tomorrow requires an active effort from all of us.
Canada looks forward to hosting World Environment Day on June 5 this year. Like Earth Day, it will be an occasion to celebrate our connections to our environment and to each other.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to take a moment today to go outside, find renewal in nature, and appreciate the environment that connects us all.

Every year, almost 13 million Canadians across the country volunteer their time, energy, and talent to help improve the well-being of others and make Canada an even greater place to live.
National Volunteer Week is a time to celebrate Canadian volunteers and thank them for the selfless work they do to help those around them. As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation in 2017, we honour the essential contributions volunteers make to our country, this week and throughout the year.
This year’s theme –Volunteering, eh? How do you recognize volunteering in 2017? –encourages us to celebrate the many acts of generosity that Canadians carry out each day. Whether cleaning up our shorelines, tutoring young people after school, or preparing a meal for Canadians in need, volunteers remind us that our commitment to support each other makes us who we are as a country.
The Government of Canada is proud to honour the contributions of these exceptional individuals through Canada’s Volunteer Awards. Canada’s communities are stronger and more inclusive thanks to the efforts and dedication of our countless volunteers.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to take the time this week to thank a volunteer who is making a difference in your community by using the hashtags #MakeADifference and #NVW2017.
At sundown tonight, Jewish communities and others in Canada and around the world will unite to commemorate the lives of the six million Jews who were systematically murdered by the Nazis during the Holocaust.
Memorial candles will be lit to honour victims and survivors. The Mourner’s Kaddish will be repeated, reaffirming the commitment of the Jewish people to God in the face of tragedy.
The atrocities carried out during the Holocaust have caused some people to ask whether it is possible to still have faith in humanity. Yom HaShoah teaches us that we must maintain that faith. To honour the victims of the Holocaust is to recognize their humanity, which no human act can erase.
At Auschwitz this year, participants in the March of the Living will walk in silence as a testament to the resilience of the survivors of the Holocaust. In Israel, a whole nation will pause as air raid sirens sound in remembrance. Here in Canada, events across the country will be held to commemorate those who perished, and to honour the survivors, and those who risked their lives to save others.
Today, I call on all Canadians to guard against a resurgence of anti-Semitism and racism, and to fight all forms of hatred and discrimination, whenever and wherever they occur. It is up to all of us to bring meaning to the solemn vow: ‘Never again.’
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I extend our thoughts and prayers to all those observing Yom HaShoah.
Every year on this day, we join people in many countries around the world to honour and remember workers who have been killed, injured, or suffered illness because of workplace hazards and accidents.
Unfortunately, not all workplaces are safe, and some jobs require people to put themselves in harm’s way. Each year in Canada, thousands of employees suffer workplace-related illnesses, are injured, or lose their lives while on the job. Workplace hazards can affect not only workers themselves, but also their families and communities.
Next month, we will mark the 25th anniversary of the Westray mine disaster. In remembering that terrible day, our government commits to working to ensure the Westray Law is applied effectively, and negligent employers are held responsible.
The Government of Canada is committed to the health, safety, and wellbeing of all workers across the country. We will continue to work closely with organized labour, employers, employees, stakeholders, and provincial and territorial partners to educate and raise awareness about work-related dangers, and to help prevent accidents, injuries, and illnesses in the workplace. Part of this commitment includes our pledge to ban the manufacturing, importing, exporting and use of asbestos in Canada by 2018.
On this sombre day, I encourage all Canadians to take a moment to pause and honour those workers who have lost their lives, been injured, disabled, or became sick while on the job. Together, let us renew our commitment to making Canada a healthier and safer place to work and live.
This week, I encourage all Canadians to #GetLoud to raise awareness about mental health, an important, but sometimes invisible, aspect of our general health.
This year’s campaign, led by the Canadian Mental Health Association, asks us to speak up to make sure Canadians get the mental health care they need, when they need it. Mental health is a core part of our well-being, but too often long wait times or limited services stop Canadians from getting the mental health care they need.
That is why the Government of Canada will provide $5 billion over the next 10 years to provinces and territories to support mental health initiatives. These investments will help improve access to evidence-based interventions and mental health services and care for people across the country. With a particular focus on youth and young adults, this will help as many as 500,000 young Canadians.
We also know that providing greater access to care and support is just half of the equation. Having access to safe, adequate and affordable housing, and being able to find and keep a good paying job are also part of what makes a difference in people’s health. That is why the Government of Canada is making major investments in both housing and employment initiatives. As part of the new $5 billion National Housing Fund, persons with mental health and addiction issues will receive greater support.
The Government of Canada remains committed to help communities address their unique mental health challenges. To build on Indigenous-led initiatives like the First Nations Mental Wellness Continuum Framework and the National Inuit Suicide Prevention Strategy, Budget 2017 pledges over $200 million over the next five years to increase support for mental health services for First Nations and Inuit. This includes making available, for the first time, the services of traditional healers as part of the Non-Insured Health Benefits Program administered by Health Canada.
The struggles of mental illness have affected so many of us, including my own family. For everyone who has struggled with a mental illness: thank you for sharing your stories, and for showing that being open is a strength. You are not alone. Today, I join Canadians to celebrate your resilience, and to get loud about the need for timely access to mental health services and support. Together, we can make sure all Canadians have the care and support they need to live full and healthy lives.
Today, we join our Israeli friends and Jewish communities in Canada and around the world to celebrate the 69th anniversary of the founding of the State of Israel.
Canada was one of the first countries to officially recognize Israel, and we are proud to call Israel our partner and call Israelis our friends.
Canada and Israel are closely linked in heart and in mind by common democratic values and close people-to-people connections. These provide the foundation of an expanding bilateral relationship, which includes ongoing efforts to promote peace and stability in the Middle East.
Today, while we celebrate Israel’s independence, we also reaffirm our commitment to fight anti-Semitism and anti-Zionism. Israel and its people continue to face threats throughout the world, including here in Canada. We stand on guard against a resurgence of anti-Semitism, hate, and discrimination in all its forms.
On this Independence Day, I am proud to renew Canada’s commitment to a safe and secure homeland for the Jewish people, and to a lasting peace between all peoples in the Middle East.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating Israel Independence Day a Yom Ha’atzmaut Sameach.
Shalom.

Every year, on May 3rd, we celebrate the fundamental principle of freedom of the press, and the important role journalists play in promoting democracy around the world. On this day, we take a hard look at the current state of press freedom, and pay tribute to journalists who have lost their lives in the pursuit of truth.
The theme of this year’s World Press Freedom Day is ‘Critical Minds for Critical Times: Media’s role in advancing peaceful, just and inclusive societies.’ It reminds us that peace, justice and inclusiveness are foundational values for any society that empowers individual citizens and promotes government transparency and accountability.
The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms – now in its 35th year – established the freedom of the press as a fundamental freedom. Journalists start conversations, shine light on stories that would otherwise not be told, and give Canadians the facts they need to engage in public debate and shape events around them. A free and open press is crucial to an informed and engaged citizenry, which is at the heart of a healthy democracy.
While journalistic freedom is widely recognized and respected in Canada, we cannot ignore the censorship, intimidation, false arrests and violence that many journalists face in other parts of the world. These acts give rise to fear and self-censorship, stifle societies, and undermine the right to freedom of expression. Canada will continue working to promote a vibrant and free press here and abroad.
Today, we recognize the many journalists who seek out the truth, challenge assumptions and expose injustices, often at great personal risk. They are the cornerstones of any strong and healthy democracy, informing and challenging us all to think more critically about the world around us.

On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to congratulate Emmanuel Macron on his election as the next President of France.
Canada and France share a warm and historic relationship, rooted in our common history, deep cultural ties, people-to-people connections, and strong economic partnership. We also closely collaborate on important international issues as strong allies and partners with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, G7, G20 and La Francophonie.
I look forward to working closely with President-elect Macron in the years ahead as we work together on a progressive agenda to promote international security, increase collaboration in science and technology, and create good, middle class jobs on both sides of the Atlantic. This also includes implementing the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement.

On behalf of all Canadians, I would like to congratulate Mr. Moon Jae-in on his election as the next President of the Republic of Korea.
Canada and the Republic of Korea enjoy a close relationship, based on our strategic partnership, a modern free-trade agreement and common values. We look forward to expanding cooperation based on our recently signed Canada-Korea Science, Technology and Innovation Agreement. Canada also collaborates with the Republic of Korea on important international issues as strong partners in the G20, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
I look forward to working with President Moon to deepen relations between our two countries.
Canada remains steadfast in its support of the Republic of Korea and will continue to work with our international partners to enhance peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region, including on the Korean Peninsula.

Today, Buddhists in Canada and around the world will celebrate Vesak, the most important of the Buddhist festivals. Vesak is a time when Buddhists come together to reflect on the birth, enlightenment and passing of Gautama Buddha, the founder of Buddhism.
Around the world, Buddhists will visit their local temples to pray, and to offer gifts to show respect and gratitude to the Buddha for his life and wisdom.
This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I encourage all Canadians to reflect on the Buddha’s universal teachings of peace, selfless service, and showing compassion toward others, especially those in need. These shared values unite us as Canadians, and are at the heart of Canada’s success.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I offer our best wishes to all those observing this sacred day.

Three hundred and seventy-five years ago today, French colonists led by Paul de Chomedey, Sieur de Maisonneuve, and Jeanne Mance established the fur trade settlement of Ville-Marie. Centuries later, we celebrate this major anniversary for the diverse and thriving Montréal we know today.
The fourth largest Francophone city in the world, Montréal is a hallmark of the central role Canada’s Francophone community has played, and continues to play, in building our country. We honour the foundational contributions the French-speaking community has made to Canada, and we celebrate Montréal as a dynamic economic and cultural hub.
We also recognize the Indigenous People who originally inhabited this island and knew it by its Indigenous name, Hochelaga. Thanks in great part to its Francophone and Indigenous roots, Montréal represents the best of Canada’s openness, diversity, and inclusiveness. Today, Montréal is home to people from all over the world who speak different languages, practice different religions, and represent different cultures. This diversity sets the city apart as an example of pluralism for the rest of the world.
The former host of EXPO 67 and the 1976 Olympics, Montréal is the birthplace of the Just for Laughs Festival and the Cirque du Soleil. This city is home to an incredible arts scene, world class educational institutions, a large business community, diverse and world-renowned cuisine, and a rich sports legacy – most notably the Montréal Canadiens, winners of a record 24 Stanley Cups. The people who have called Montréal home are artists, inventors, Nobel laureates, world-class athletes, musicians, activists, and entrepreneurs – all of whom have shaped Canada and the world.
As both a proud Montrealer and a Member of Parliament representing other Montrealers, I am happy and honoured to celebrate this important anniversary for my hometown. On behalf of all Canadians, bravo Montréal!
Today marks #IDAHOT – the International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia.
No matter who we love or how we identify, all of us deserve to feel safe and secure, live free from discrimination and persecution, and express ourselves fully. Today – and every day – I join Canadians to support gender expression, gender identity and sexual orientation rights for people in Canada and around the world, and to challenge stigma, violence, and prejudices wherever they occur.
Through measures including Bills C-16 and C-39 – and with the help of Member of Parliament Randy Boissonnault, Special Advisor on LGBTQ2 issues – our Government continues to work to make sure transgender and other gender-diverse people, as well as people of diverse sexual orientations, can live freely and fully according to their identity. Canada will seek to co-chair the Equal Rights Coalition, to provide leadership within the new inter-governmental network to protect and promote the rights of lesbian, gay, transgender, and intersex people around the world.
In Canada and around the world, we must continue to fight against homophobia, transphobia, and biphobia, and to defend gender expression, gender identity and sexual orientation rights. We deplore the recent, reprehensible reports of violations of the human rights of gay and bisexual men in Chechnya. We call for the protection of all people in Chechnya whose sexual orientation makes them a target for persecution. Human rights have no borders.
Today, I ask Canadians and people around the world to fight hatred, honour love, and defend human rights for everyone. Together, we can build a world where all of us are free to be who we are and love who we love.
Today, we mark the eighth anniversary of the end of the war in Sri Lanka. I extend my deepest sympathies to those who were affected and their families, as we solemnly reflect and honour the lives that were lost during this 26 year war.
As we remember the trauma and loss, we must continue to work to heal the wounds of all those who have suffered, and to achieve long-term reconciliation and peace in the country.
I reiterate my call to the Government of Sri Lanka to ensure that a process of accountability is established that will have the trust and confidence of the victims of this war. To this end, Sri Lanka should fulfill its international commitments by ensuring the involvement of Commonwealth and international investigators, prosecutors and judges.   
I extend my deepest sympathy and support to Canadians of Tamil descent. As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, we recognize the contributions Tamil-Canadians have made to Canada and the adversity that they have overcome.

I was devastated when I heard about the innocent victims who were killed or injured at the Ariana Grande concert tonight in Manchester – many of them far too young.
On behalf of all Canadians, our deepest condolences go out to the families and friends of those who were killed. We also wish a speedy recovery to everyone who was injured.
Canada and the United Kingdom are the closest of friends, and we stand together as a people in this most tragic of circumstances.
With our allies and partners, we will continue to counter such senseless acts and to fight terrorism in its many forms. We will do all that we can to assist British authorities in bringing those responsible to justice.
Our hearts are with the people of the United Kingdom tonight, and we mourn with them the loss of so many innocent victims.
More than a century ago today, a great injustice took place when most of the 376 passengers onboard the Komagata Maru steamship were denied entry into Canada and forced to return to India where some were killed and many imprisoned.
Last year, I stood in the House of Commons to apologize on behalf of the Government of Canada to all those affected by this tragic incident. An unjust federal law ultimately led to these passengers being turned away. For that grave injustice and for the regrettable consequences that followed, we are sorry.
The Komagata Maru passengers share much in common with the many immigrants, past and present, who have come to Canada to build a better life for themselves and their families. By offering compassion and a fair chance at success, we not only help provide more opportunities for them and their loved ones, we also build a better Canada – one that is stronger, more inclusive, and more prosperous.
Today, we honour the victims of the Komagata Maru tragedy and their descendants. Canadians are proud to be part of a country that respects and protects multiculturalism as a core and defining value, and we thank all those from the South Asian community who make such invaluable contributions to our society. We benefit greatly from the vibrant diversity of our country.
I was appalled and angered to learn of the vicious attack earlier today on Coptic Christians travelling to the monastery of Saint Samuel the Confessor in Egypt’s Minya governate.
On behalf of Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to everyone who has lost loved ones because of these heinous acts. We also hope and pray that those injured have a safe, complete and rapid recovery.
This is the third major attack on Egypt’s Coptic Christian community in less than two months, a community already reeling from years of discrimination and violence. Today’s victims included women and many children heading to the monastery for worship, as well as workmen serving there as gardeners and builders.
In this troubling time, the people of Egypt can count on Canada’s friendship and support, and we offer our full assistance to the Government of Egypt.
As recent events show, violent extremists often target those most vulnerable. As members of the international community, we must continue to stand against those responsible for these acts of terrorism and counter hate by promoting the values of diversity, inclusion and peace.

Tonight at sunset, Muslims in Canada and around the world will mark the start of Ramadan.
Ramadan is a sacred time of the year for the Muslim community, and commemorates the revealing of the Qur'an to Prophet Muhammad. The month-long journey of fasting and prayer encourages spiritual growth, reflection, and compassion for those who are less fortunate.
Ramadan is also a time of community, when Muslims gather with family and friends to pray and share iftar, the evening meal. For all of us, Ramadan is a reminder to appreciate the many gifts we are given, and to give generously to others, in our communities and around the world.
This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Muslim Canadians help make Canada the strong, diverse, and inclusive country it is today.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to Muslim communities here in Canada and around the world.
Ramadan Mubarak!

Today, we honour the brave United Nations (UN) peacekeepers who work selflessly to provide safety and security for people around the world. We also pay tribute to the over 3,500 UN peacekeepers – including 122 Canadians – who have died in the service of peace.
The women and men who serve as UN peacekeepers protect people from the worst effects of war – and set the stage for peace. They protect civilians, monitor ceasefires, help combatants disarm, and support peace processes as groups move forward after conflict. Peacekeepers work at the centre of many tense and dangerous situations, often endangering their own lives to help those most in need.
Our country has a long and proud history of peacekeeping. Lester B. Pearson, Canada’s fourteenth Prime Minister and then Secretary of State for External Affairs, proposed the first large-scale UN peacekeeping mission during the 1956 Suez Crisis. For his commitment to a peaceful resolution to the crisis, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1957.
Sixty years later, Canada will host the 2017 UN Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial as we continue to work with our international partners to strengthen peacekeeping efforts.
Peacekeeping embodies Canada’s commitment to the protection of human rights and the empowerment of women and girls. We must ensure women’s voices and experiences are represented in peace processes. There cannot be lasting peace without women.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank UN peacekeepers past and present who have dedicated themselves to advance peace and human rights around the world. Their bravery represents humanity at its most selfless. We will continue to work closely with the UN to support peacekeeping operations.

Nova Scotians have chosen to re-elect a majority government led by the Nova Scotia Liberal Party.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I offer my sincere congratulations to Stephen McNeil who continues to have the honour and privilege to serve as Premier.
I look forward to continuing to work closely with the provincial government to create middle class jobs through the Atlantic Growth Strategy, as well as to promote the well-being of Indigenous Peoples, and safeguard Nova Scotia’s clean air and water.
By working closely together, we will grow the industries and sectors at the heart of the province’s prosperity, promote clean growth, and protect our environment for generations to come.


We are deeply disappointed that the United States federal government has decided to withdraw from the Paris Agreement. Canada is unwavering in our commitment to fight climate change and support clean economic growth. Canadians know we need to take decisive and collective action to tackle the many harsh realities of our changing climate.
While the U.S. decision is disheartening, we remain inspired by the growing momentum around the world to combat climate change and transition to clean growth economies. We are proud that Canada stands united with all the other parties that support the Agreement. We will continue to work with our domestic and international partners to drive progress on one of the greatest challenges we face as a world.
This is not only about the huge economic opportunities of clean growth and the need to address the pressing threats of climate change. This is about an ambitious and unshakeable desire to leave a cleaner, healthier and more sustainable planet for our kids and for generations to come.
We are all custodians of this world, and that is why Canada will continue to work with the U.S. at the state level, and with other U.S. stakeholders, to address climate change and promote clean growth. We will also continue to reach out to the U.S. federal government to discuss this matter of critical importance for all humankind, and to identify areas of shared interest for collaboration, including on emissions reductions.

Canada strongly condemns the senseless attack that took place last night in London, United Kingdom, which killed and injured many innocent people. I am heartbroken that a Canadian is among those killed.
We grieve with the families and friends of those who have lost loved ones, and wish all those injured a speedy and full recovery.
Londoners and people across the United Kingdom have always displayed strength and resilience in the face of adversity. We recently witnessed this after the attacks in Manchester and in the Westminster area of London. This time will be no different.
These hateful acts do not deter us; they only strengthen our resolve. Canadians stand united with the British people. We will continue to work together with the United Kingdom and all our allies to fight terrorism and bring perpetrators to justice.
The Government of Canada will not comment further at this time out of respect for the family.

Today, on Canadian Armed Forces Day, we thank the soldiers, sailors, airmen and airwomen who courageously defend our country’s fundamental values and interests, protect North America, and contribute to international peace and security.
Whether on military operations, peace missions, or during disaster relief responses, the brave men and women of our military always answer the call with pride, dedication and professionalism. In recent years, this has included responding to floods and wildfires, and welcoming more than 25,000 Syrian refugees to Canada. They have also participated in the global coalition against Daesh, and helped train Ukrainian Armed Forces.
On this day, we also remember the dedicated members of our Armed Forces who have lost their lives serving our country. We owe them and their families an immeasurable debt of gratitude for their sacrifice.
This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us honour our brave service men and women, who continue to defend the Canadian values of peace, freedom and democracy around the world.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I join with all Canadians to extend our most sincere thanks to past and present members of the Canadian Armed Forces – and their families – for their unwavering service. We honour all they do to keep the peace and protect our freedom.


Today, we join the global community to celebrate World Environment Day – an opportunity to connect with nature and to recommit ourselves to build a cleaner, more sustainable world for generations to come. This year, Canada will host the official global celebrations for the first time. We are proud to celebrate our shared environment, and to work with our partners around the world to leave a cleaner, healthier planet for all our children.
The theme for this year’s World Environment Day, ‘Connecting People to Nature,’ encourages us to get outdoors, appreciate the healthy ecosystems that contribute to our well-being, and do our part to protect the planet we share.
World Environment Day reminds us that we have a global responsibility to safeguard our environment – and that each of us has a role to play to preserve and protect it. More than ever, Canada is committed to provide international leadership to fight climate change and support clean economic growth. We will continue to work with our domestic and international partners to drive progress on the environmental challenges we face as a global community.
Canada has taken strong steps to protect the environment and promote clean economic growth. We adopted the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, launched the Oceans Protection Plan, and continue to support developing countries in mitigating and adapting to climate change. Despite this progress, we have much more work to do. Our Government is committed to work with people around the world and at home, including young people and Indigenous Peoples, to find concrete, effective solutions to environmental issues.
Today, I ask all Canadians and everyone around the world to remember we share one planet. Climate change does not recognize borders, and few challenges have ever been so global in scale. Our children's future depends on our immediate and collective response.

Every day, Canada’s public servants work hard to strengthen the middle class, deliver services to Canadians, and help tackle the challenges we face as a country.
Over the past year, federal public servants have negotiated international trade agreements, responded to the wildfire in Fort McMurray and the flooding that struck many communities, and helped Syrian refugees resettle here, in their new country. No matter the challenge, they rise to the occasion, and put the needs of Canadians at the centre of all they do.
At the same time, public servants have experienced many hardships caused by the implementation of the Phoenix pay system. This problem is unacceptable, and we are working tirelessly to make sure every employee gets the pay they are owed.
This year’s theme is ‘Proudly Serving Canadians for 150 years’. As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, we honour the tremendous work of our federal public servants and their important contributions to building our nation.
With passion, professionalism, and an unwavering commitment to Canadians, federal public servants often go above and beyond in their work in all regions of the country. They play a vital role in our democracy, and have become the envy of governments around the world.
As we look ahead to the next 150 years, we remain committed to a world-class Public Service that is modern, efficient, and reflects the diversity of the people and country it serves.
To federal public servants, I say thank you. You play an integral role in our society, and your hard work and dedication benefit us all. I look forward to continuing to work with you to strengthen the middle class and build a Canada where everyone has a chance to succeed.

The Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, today issued the following statement on Philippine Independence Day:
Today, we join the Filipino community in Canada, in the Philippines, and around the world in celebrating the 119th anniversary of Philippine Independence.
More than 700,000 Canadians trace their heritage to the Philippines. Canada looks forward to continue working with the Philippines on bilateral and global issues, including peace and security, good governance and development cooperation.
Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride. This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us recognize the important contributions of the Filipino-Canadian community to our national fabric.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish all those celebrating today a happy Independence Day.
Maligayang araw ng kalayaan!
Mabuhay!

Today, we mourn the passing of Helmut Kohl, who served as Chancellor of Germany from 1982 to 1998.
Mr. Kohl believed in cooperation and reconciliation, and was driven by a vision of a unified, modern Germany. Within a year of the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, this dream was realized with the reunification of East and West Germany and the first free, universal election in the country in almost 60 years.
His calls for unity did not stop at the German border. Mr. Kohl also advocated for a political and economic union within Europe. He spearheaded the Maastricht Treaty, which led to the current European Union and the single European currency.
I have fond memories of meeting Mr. Kohl when I was a child. Many Germans will be mourning his passage today. I mourn alongside them.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our condolences to the family and friends of Mr. Kohl, the German people, and all who admired his tireless efforts in favour of unity and cooperation. 


On World Refugee Day, we honour the strength and resilience of the millions of people around the world fleeing conflict, insecurity, and persecution. We solemnly acknowledge the hardships they face, celebrate the significant contributions they make to our communities, and recognize the dedication of those who help them.
Today, over 65 million people are displaced around the world, and more than 22 million of them are refugees. They flee unlivable situations in their homelands, crossing deserts and seas to escape, and carrying dreams of a new life even as they struggle with intense loss. These hardships particularly affect women, who bear different and disproportionate effects of conflict and insecurity.
Canadians are fortunate to live in a country shaped, over the centuries, by the dreams and hard work of millions of immigrants and refugees. Today, we recognize their dignity and potential. Despite the hardships they face, these individuals make many contributions to shape the diverse, strong, and prosperous country Canada is today.
Canada has a long tradition of welcoming refugees, and today, Canadians continue to help newcomers establish their lives here with compassion and openness. In recent years, communities across the country have welcomed over 40,000 Syrian refugees. Their generosity illustrates the spirit of compassion that defines us as Canadians. When we embrace our differences and come together to welcome newcomers, we strengthen our communities in enduring ways.
Rising conflict, insecurity, and persecution today have led to migration levels not seen since the Second World War. We have a global responsibility to respond to this crisis and to support those who are forced to leave home. We must address the root causes of forced migration by seeking diplomatic solutions for violent conflicts and standing united in the fight against terrorism. We must also redouble our efforts on climate change, so that it does not further exacerbate insecurity in the world.
Today, I call on Canadians and people around the world to stand with people seeking shelter from enormous hardship and violence. Refugees are forced to leave home, but they carry with them dreams for their children and the hope of creating a better world. Let us show compassion for their plight, recognize their dignity, and continue to see ourselves in each other.


Over twenty years ago, the Government of Canada, together with Indigenous organizations, designated this day – the summer solstice – as National Aboriginal Day.
Every year, we join together on this day to recognize the fundamental contributions that First Nations, Inuit, and the Métis Nation have made to the identity and culture of all Canadians. The history, art, traditions, and cultures of Indigenous Peoples have shaped our past, and continue to shape who we are today.
No relationship is more important to Canada than the relationship with Indigenous Peoples. Our Government is working together with Indigenous Peoples to build a nation-to-nation, Inuit-Crown, government-to-government relationship – one based on respect, partnership, and recognition of rights.
We are determined to make a real difference in the lives of Indigenous Peoples – by closing socio-economic gaps, supporting greater self-determination, and establishing opportunities to work together on shared priorities. We are also reviewing all federal laws and policies that concern Indigenous Peoples and making progress on the Calls to Action outlined in the Final Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish everyone a happy National Aboriginal Day. I invite all Canadians to take part in the #NADCanada activities in their community and to learn about the history, cultures and traditions of Indigenous Peoples. The 150th anniversary of Confederation this year reminds us of the legacy of the past. As we look forward to the next 150 years, we commit to move ahead together in a spirit of reconciliation and respect.
This year, I am also pleased to announce that from here forward the Government’s intention is to rename this day National Indigenous Peoples Day.


Last year, we raised taxes on the wealthiest one per cent so we could cut taxes for the middle class. We put more money in the pockets of nine out of ten families through the Canada Child Benefit, and strengthened the Canada Pension Plan so more Canadians can achieve a strong, secure, and stable retirement. In 2017, we have built on these accomplishments, and taken further steps to create good, middle class jobs while growing the economy over the long term.
Between February and June, I signed agreements with the leaders of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, the Assembly of First Nations, and the Métis National Council, establishing a process to advance shared priorities for Inuit, First Nations, and the Métis Nation.
In February, I welcomed the European Parliament’s approval of the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) between Canada and the European Union. CETA is a gold-standard agreement that will give consumers more choice, make it easier and less costly for businesses to compete, and create good, middle class jobs on both sides of the Atlantic.
In March, Minister Morneau tabled one of the most forward-looking budgets in Canada’s history. With its strong focus on innovation and skills, Budget 2017 prepares Canadians for the changing economy and secures Canada’s place as a hub of innovation.
Budget 2017 makes significant investments in public transit systems, which will result in shorter commute times, less air pollution, and more efficient, better integrated transit. It also invests $11.2 billion in affordable housing to make sure all families have access to a safe and affordable place to live. Budget 2017 is the first federal budget ever to include a gender-based statement, which looks at the ways our policies and investments affect women and men differently.
In April, we introduced a bill to legalize, strictly regulate, and restrict access to cannabis no later than July 2018. Our legislation will, for the first time, make it a specific criminal offence to sell cannabis to a minor and create significant penalties for those who engage young Canadians in cannabis-related offences.
In May, we unveiled tax relief measures for deployed Canadian Armed Forces personnel and police officers. We also introduced Bill C-48, the Oil Tanker Moratorium Act, and kept our promise to put a moratorium on crude oil tanker shipping on British Columbia’s north coast. At the end of the month, we announced that Canada will host the 2018 G7 Summit in Charlevoix, Quebec.
On June 6, Minister Freeland outlined a new foreign policy for Canada, and underscored our commitment to a rules-based international order, progressive trade policies, gender equality, and fighting climate change. The next day, Minister Sajjan unveiled Canada’s new defence policy, which establishes a credible, realistic, and funded strategy for our military and, most importantly, will deliver the standard of service and care our women and men in uniform deserve.
A few days later, Minister Bibeau launched Canada’s new Feminist International Assistance Policy. This vision focuses Canada’s international assistance on the empowerment of women and girls, and positions Canada as a leader on gender equality in aid programming. Minister Duclos also announced the Multilateral Early Learning and Child Care Framework, which will ensure more Canadian families have access to affordable,high-quality, and inclusive child care.
This month, we announced that we will introduce legislation to make it possible to erase the convictions for Canadians who were found guilty of consensual sexual activity with a same sex partner under historical, unjust laws. Three important pieces of government legislation passed Parliament: Bill C-4, which restores a fair and balanced approach to labour relations; Bill C-6, which ends second-class citizenship and makes it easier for hardworking immigrants to become citizens; and Bill C-16, which ensures the full protection of transgender people across Canada.
Earlier this week, Minister Goodale tabled legislation to create a new National Security and Intelligence Review Agency and introduce changes to Bill C-51, which will strengthen security and better protect Canadians’ rights.
We have made real progress in helping the middle class and those working hard to join it. Since December 2015, Canada’s unemployment rate has dropped from 7.1 per cent to 6.6 per cent. In the last year, the Canadian economy has created over 300,000 new jobs. We still have plenty of work to do, but as we get ready to celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I am confident that Canada’s best days lie ahead.


Today, we remember the largest mass murder and terrorist act in Canada’s history. On this day, 32 years ago, 329 innocent people – citizens of Canada, Britain, the United States and India – were killed by a terrorist’s bomb while travelling on Air India Flight 182. This appalling and cowardly act left families and friends grieving the loss of loved ones, and shook our country to its core. Since that day, we have lost hundreds more Canadians to terrorist acts in our country and around the world.
This past year, a Canadian mother was killed and her son injured in a terrorist attack in Jordan. Two young Canadian women were also killed – one in a New Year’s Day attack in Turkey, and one less than a month ago in London.
Here in Canada, we grieved with the people of Ste-Foy, Quebec, after six men – fathers, brothers, uncles – were killed during a shooting at the Centre culturel islamique de Québec. The attack sought to instill fear and divide Canadians against themselves. Instead, Canadians came together.
Our best response is to deepen our resolve to uphold democratic values of pluralism, diversity, and inclusiveness.  We are a welcoming and generous country, and know that diversity and openness to the world are sources of strength. They have made Canada not only more prosperous, but safer and more united.
Canada condemns all forms of terrorism, from any source. We will continue to work closely with our allies, and the international community, to prevent radicalization and fight terrorism both at home and abroad. We will always promote and defend human rights, justice, and equality – values that are vital tools in the fight against intolerance, hatred, and fear.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I extend our deepest condolences to all who have experienced the pain and trauma of losing a loved one to terrorism. We also thank those in the military, intelligence, and law enforcement communities in Canada and around the world who work, often at great personal risk, to keep us and our families safe. 


Today, on la Fête nationale du Québec, Sophie and I join our fellow Quebecers to proudly celebrate the unique history and identity of Quebec. As we gather with family and friends, we honour this proud and dynamic culture that makes Quebec prosper.
On Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day, we also join Francophones across the country to celebrate our language, heritage and traditions.
The French language and francophone culture are foundational to our country, and they continue to shape our values, our aspirations and our Canadian identity. Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day is an opportunity for all of us to reflect on the essential contributions Francophones have made to build the diverse, strong and inclusive country that we all call home.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I offer our best wishes to Quebecers, Francophones and all those celebrating la Fête nationale du Québec and Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day.


Tonight at sunset, Muslims in Canada and around the world will celebrate Eid al-Fitr,also known as the festival of breaking of the fast.
Eid al-Fitr is one of the most important religious holidays for the Muslim community, and marks the end of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan. It is a time to give thanks for the spiritual growth and the blessings received throughout the holy month.
On this occasion, family and friends gather to attend special morning prayers, exchange greetings and gifts, share a celebratory meal, and give generously to others, especially those less fortunate.
Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride. This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, we recognize the invaluable contributions the Muslim community makes to our national fabric.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating Eid al-Fitr.
Eid Mubarak!


Today, Canadians from coast to coast to coast join together to celebrate the multiculturalism and openness that make us who we are as a country.
Canadians come from every corner of the world, speak two official languages and hundreds more, practice many faiths, and represent many cultures. Multiculturalism is at the heart of Canada’s heritage and identity – and as Canadians, we recognize that our differences make us strong.
Canada’s strong tradition of multiculturalism has allowed our society to benefit from fresh perspectives and find new answers to old problems. It has also helped Canada attract some of the most innovative and entrepreneurial people from around the world, showing that openness is the engine of both creativity and prosperity.
This year, we mark both the 150th anniversary of Confederation and the 35th anniversary of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. These milestones remind us of the values that unite us – openness, inclusion, and deep respect for our differences. Whoever we are, wherever we come from, these values bring us together as equal members of this great country.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a happy, fun, and educational Multiculturalism Day. I invite Canadians to take part in the many activities happening across the country, and I ask all of us to work even harder to protect and promote multiculturalism. Today, and every day, let us celebrate the differences that make Canada strong, diverse, inclusive, and proud.


Under the leadership of John Horgan, the New Democratic Party will form government in British Columbia. I look forward to working closely with Premier-designate Horgan to deliver real results on the issues that matter to British Columbians and to all Canadians.
By coming together in a spirit of cooperation, I am confident that we can grow the industries and sectors at the heart of the province’s prosperity, while promoting clean growth and innovation and investing in public transit and green infrastructure.
I also look forward to working with Premier-designate Horgan to implement the Calls to Action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, as we renew Canada’s nation-to-nation relationship with Indigenous Peoples. 
I thank Christy Clark for her work as premier and her public service contributions to the province, the people of British Columbia, and the country as a whole.


Today, we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation. We come together as Canadians to celebrate the achievements of our great country, reflect on our past and present, and look boldly toward our future.
Canada’s story stretches back long before Confederation, to the first people who worked, loved, and built their lives here, and to those who came here centuries later in search of a better life for their families. In 1867, the vision of Sir George-Étienne Cartier and Sir John A. Macdonald, among others, gave rise to Confederation – an early union, and one of the moments that have come to define Canada.
In the 150 years since, we have continued to grow and define ourselves as a country. We fought valiantly in two world wars, built the infrastructure that would connect us, and enshrined our dearest values – equality, diversity, freedom of the individual, and two official languages – in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. These moments, and many others, shaped Canada into the extraordinary country it is today – prosperous, generous, and proud.
At the heart of Canada’s story are millions of ordinary people doing extraordinary things. They exemplify what it means to be Canadian: ambitious aspirations, leadership driven by compassion, and the courage to dream boldly. Whether we were born here or have chosen Canada as our home, this is who we are.
Ours is a land of Indigenous Peoples, settlers, and newcomers, and our diversity has always been at the core of our success. Canada’s history is built on countless instances of people uniting across their differences to work and thrive together. We express ourselves in French, English, and hundreds of other languages, we practice many faiths, we experience life through different cultures, and yet we are one country. Today, as has been the case for centuries, we are strong not in spite of our differences, but because of them.
As we mark Canada 150, we also recognize that for many, today is not an occasion for celebration. Indigenous Peoples in this country have faced oppression for centuries. As a society, we must acknowledge and apologize for past wrongs, and chart a path forward for the next 150 years – one in which we continue to build our nation-to-nation, Inuit-Crown, and government-to-government relationship with the First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Nation.
Our efforts toward reconciliation reflect a deep Canadian tradition – the belief that better is always possible. Our job now is to ensure every Canadian has a real and fair chance at success. We must create the right conditions so that the middle class, and those working hard to join it, can build a better life for themselves and their families.
Great promise and responsibility await Canada. As we look ahead to the next 150 years, we will continue to rise to the most pressing challenges we face, climate change among the first ones. We will meet these challenges the way we always have – with hard work, determination, and hope.
On the 150th anniversary of Confederation, we celebrate the millions of Canadians who have come together to make our country the strong, prosperous, and open place it is today. On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish you and your loved ones a very happy Canada Day.


On the 6th of July, we pause to remember the victims of the terrible tragedy that took place in Lac-Mégantic, Quebec, in 2013. Just after midnight, a train carrying crude oil derailed and exploded in the heart of this community, taking with it the lives of 47 people in one of the worst rail disasters in Canadian history. Our thoughts are with their families, and all those whose lives were changed that day.
Four years later, this close-knit community continues to show profound resiliency in the face of the scars and trauma of those horrible events. Lac-Mégantic is rebuilding itself once again into a beautiful, vibrant, and dynamic place to live, work, and visit. 
No community should ever experience what Lac-Mégantic went through. I am committed to ensuring that rail safety remains a top priority.
To the people of Lac-Mégantic, please know that you remain in our thoughts and prayers and that you are present in every decision we make on this very important matter. We will not let up on our commitment to make the railway system safer and better for communities like yours all across Canada.


Shia Ismaili Muslims gather today in Canada and around the world to celebrate the diamond jubilee of their 49th hereditary Imam and spiritual leader, His Highness Prince Karim Aga Khan IV.
Since becoming Imam in 1957, the Aga Khan has used his role to advance global humanitarian causes, helping to support sustainable development and poverty reduction projects and enhance civil society and education around the world.
His spirit of cooperation also led the Aga Khan to establish, in 2006, the Global Centre for Pluralism, in partnership with the Government of Canada, and to choose Ottawa as its headquarters. In recognition of his commitment to diversity and pluralism and his many humanitarian efforts on behalf of people around the world, the Government of Canada made His Highness an honorary Canadian citizen in 2009.
On this day, I invite all Canadians to reflect on the Aga Khan’s example as he continues to inspire us to show compassion towards all those less fortunate than ourselves. To all Ismaili Canadians celebrating the Diamond Jubilee, I wish all of you Khushali Mubarak!


Between July 24 and 29, 1983, anti-Tamil pogroms were carried out in Colombo and other parts of Sri Lanka resulting in thousands of deaths and the displacement of countless victims.
Today, we join Canadians of Tamil descent and members of the Tamil community to commemorate the 34th anniversary of the events of Black July.
As we pause to reflect on the dark days of the Sri Lankan Civil War, we must continue to work to heal the wounds of all those who suffered. Canada welcomes international efforts underway to achieve long-term reconciliation and peace for all Sri Lankans, but we reiterate the need to establish a process of accountability that will have the trust and the confidence of the victims of this war.
Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride. As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us take the time to recognize the contributions of all who have made Canada their home regardless of their cultural, religious or linguistic background.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I extend my deepest sympathy and support to all those who have suffered immeasurable loss during the Sri Lankan Civil War.


Today, we remember the brave members of the army, navy and air forces who fought so valiantly, and sacrificed so greatly, during the Korean War.
Sixty-four years ago today, a ceasefire put an end to active fighting in the Korean War. After the Communist North’s invasion of South Korea in 1950, the brutal war lasted more than three years and cost hundreds of thousands of military and civilian lives. More than 26,000 Canadians – some only teenagers, others veterans of the Second World War – crossed the Pacific Ocean to fight under the flag of the United Nations. Over 500 Canadian soldiers, sailors, and air personnel made the ultimate sacrifice, and the lives of countless others were forever changed.
The soldiers fought in conditions reminiscent of the First World War – cold, wet trench duty punctuated by terrifying night patrols into no man’s land. They bravely battled both the harsh weather and enemy forces at places like Kapyong, the site of one of Canada’s most important victories.
We take pride in Canada’s contributions, along with those of our United Nations allies, to defending the sovereignty of South Korea. The courage and sacrifice of our Korean War veterans helped South Korea to become the peaceful and prosperous country we know today.
Today, I urge all Canadians to learn more about the Korean War, and to participate in activities being held to honour the veterans. As we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, let us recognize all those in our military, and their families who support them. They help defend our most cherished values – openness, democracy, compassion, and respect for human rights – in Canada and around the world.


Today, we recognize the women and men in Canada’s military and police forces who work to create peace and stability around the world.
Canada’s strong tradition of peacekeeping owes much to Lester B. Pearson, who championed the first armed United Nations peacekeeping mission during the Suez Crisis in 1956. Our history of peacekeeping goes back even further, though, to our earliest missions to build peace and security across the globe.
In 1949, Canada sent dedicated peacekeepers abroad for the first time – to bring calm to a dispute between India and Pakistan over the region of Kashmir. A few years later, in the Middle East in 1954, Major-General E. L. M. Burns became the first of many Canadians to command a UN peacekeeping mission.
Over the years, Canadian peacekeepers have helped monitor ceasefires, protect the most vulnerable from the ravages of war, and build the foundations of peace. Peacekeepers often endanger their own lives to help those most affected by violent conflict, in particular women and girls. They work tirelessly to protect human rights, and to ensure the voices of the most vulnerable are represented in peace processes.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank all of our country’s peacekeepers – past and present – for their courageous efforts to build lasting peace around the world. They represent the best of Canada. We will continue to work with the UN and other organizations to create a safer, more secure world for all.


On the International Day of the World’s Indigenous Peoples, we recognize Indigenous Peoples around the world, and recommit to protect and promote the rights of Indigenous Peoples.
This year, the United Nations highlights the 10th anniversary of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. The declaration addresses the rights of Indigenous Peoples, including the right to self-determination. It also outlines how principles of equality, partnership, and mutual respect must form the foundation of collaborative relationships with Indigenous Peoples.
Many Indigenous leaders in Canada persevered over twenty-five years to advocate for, draft, and negotiate the UN Declaration. Canada is grateful for their leadership, and fully supports the declaration.
No relationship is more important to Canada than the one with Indigenous Peoples. We are taking concrete steps to create a renewed relationship with First Nations, Inuit, and the Métis Nation – based on recognition of rights, respect, collaboration, and partnership.
We are working in partnership with Indigenous Peoples to review federal laws and policies to ensure we respect both our constitutional obligations and international standards, including those set out in the UN Declaration. We are also working collaboratively, transparently, and on a distinctions-basis to co-develop national First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Nation languages legislation, and we are making progress to address the Calls to Action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. We are also creating a new space for Indigenous Peoples near Parliament Hill, which will honour our nation-to-nation, Inuit-Crown, and government-to-government relationship with Indigenous Peoples and recognize their importance to this country’s foundation and its future.
Despite this progress, much work remains to be done to advance meaningful reconciliation and to make sure that Indigenous Peoples’ rights and voices are fully respected. We will continue to work with First Nations, Inuit, and the Métis Nation to identify and make progress on shared priorities, so that their voices and perspectives guide the way forward.
Our world’s history is one in which the rights, culture, history, and languages of Indigenous Peoples have been dismissed or violated for far too long. Today, we acknowledge this unacceptable past, and we commit to build a world where the rights of Indigenous Peoples are respected. Together, we can continue our journey of reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples – and create a better future for all of us.

Today, I am pleased and relieved to confirm that Pastor Lim has been released from jail in North Korea and that he will soon be reunited with his family and friends in Canada.
The Government of Canada was actively engaged on Mr. Lim’s case at all levels. In particular, I want to thank Sweden, our protecting power in North Korea, for assisting us.
This week, a Canadian government delegation led by Daniel Jean, my Special Envoy, traveled to Pyongyang, North Korea, to discuss Pastor Lim’s case.
Pastor Lim’s health and well-being remain of utmost importance to the Government of Canada, and we are working to ensure that he receives any required medical attention.
Operational security considerations prevent us from discussing the matter further.
I ask that the family’s wish for privacy be respected.

On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank Premier Brad Wall for his many years of service to Saskatchewan and our country.
I have had the privilege of working closely with Premier Wall for more than a year and a half. In that time, we have made important progress on the issues that matter most to middle class Canadians, including pensions, health care, growing our agricultural industry, and promoting our natural resources to the world.
Premier Wall has worked tirelessly to promote Canada and Canadian exports with our international trading partners. His efforts will benefit the people of Saskatchewan for years to come.
Sophie and I thank Premier Wall for his many years of public service, and we wish him and his family the very best in the future.


Today, on International Youth Day, we celebrate the limitless potential of young people. We put a spotlight on their ideas and aspirations, which have the power to change the world. We are inspired by their courage, passion, and the positive change they make every day.
The theme of this year’s International Youth Day – Youth Building Peace – emphasizes how young leaders can help move societies beyond conflict and violence by promoting gender equality, inclusion, and education. Earlier this year, I had the opportunity to meet one of these young peace builders, Malala Yousafzai. Her relentless and inspiring work reminds us that young people are not just the leaders of tomorrow – they are leaders today.
Listening to and appreciating the diverse views of young people will help us turn the vision of a more peaceful and prosperous planet into a reality. That is why we have taken concrete steps like creating the Prime Minister’s Youth Council to give young people a voice in decisions that will shape their lives, their communities, and their country.
As Minister of Youth, I know that young people everywhere are trying to make a difference. We must continue to amplify their voices, give them a seat at the table, and connect them with opportunities. Our future success depends on it.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all celebrating International Youth Day.

Today, we join Pakistani communities in Canada and around the world to celebrate seven decades of Pakistan’s independence.
Our two countries established a diplomatic relationship shortly after Pakistan was declared a sovereign nation in 1947. We continue to work together to advance shared priorities, including governance and democracy, regional security, poverty reduction, polio eradication, trade, defence, and the fight against climate change.
The people-to-people connections between Canada and Pakistan are older still. People from what is now Pakistan first migrated to Canada well over a century ago and, since then, our connections have continued to grow.
As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation in 2017, we honour the many cultures and communities that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Pakistani-Canadians continue to make major contributions to our country, and help make Canada the prosperous, vibrant, and open place it is today.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I offer our best wishes to all those celebrating Pakistan’s Independence Day.


Today, the people of the Republic of Korea and Korean communities in Canada and around the world celebrate the 72nd anniversary of Korea’s independence, also known as ‘Gwangbokjeol’ or ‘Restoration of Light Day’.
Over sixty years ago, thousands of Canadians fought in the Korean War in the defence of the Republic of Korea. Since then, the Republic of Korea and Canada have been close friends and increasingly important economic partners. Today, we share a commitment to democratic values, open markets, and the rule of law.
I look forward to working with President Moon Jae-in to further deepen the relationship between our two countries. Together, we will address important international issues, including peace and collective security, climate change, and trade liberalization.
As Canada celebrates 150 years since Confederation, I invite all Canadians to recognize the significant contributions that Korean Canadians have made, and continue to make, to our country.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a happy Independence Day.


Today, we join the people of India and members of the Indo-Canadian community to celebrate India’s 71st Independence Day.
Our two countries share much in common, including our commitment to democracy, freedom, and the rule of law, and are linked by similar institutions and forms of government. Above all, the success of Canada and India demonstrate that we both prosper not in spite of our diversity, but because of it.
We enjoy a special relationship – one that we are committed to strengthening. I recently met with Prime Minister Narendra Modi at the G20 Leaders’ Summit. I look forward to continuing to collaborate with him on global issues, including peace and security, health, climate change, and gender equality.
As we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I invite Canadians to reflect on the countless contributions Indo-Canadians make to our national fabric. Canada is a  stronger and more prosperous country because of them.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish a happy Independence Day to all those celebrating.


Today, we celebrate the proud heritage and vibrant culture of the Acadian people. We also recognize their resilience through history, and the significant role they have played in shaping Canada.
National Acadian Day traces its roots to the first Acadian national convention held in 1881 in Memramcook, New Brunswick. During that convention, Acadian delegates chose to celebrate their national day on Our Lady of Assumption Day, in recognition of their French Catholic heritage.
Descendants of French settlers, Acadians hold a unique place in Canada’s history. Over centuries, they survived a deportation, endured exile, and persevered through relentless persecution. Despite these hardships, Acadians grew into a distinct community with a beautiful language, a colourful culture, and a rich set of customs. Today, Acadian music, poetry, literature, and theatre entertain and inspire people around the world.
As we celebrate 150 years since Confederation, we also take time to recognize the people and communities at the heart of Canada’s success. Acadians reflect the vibrant diversity that defines us as a country, and they continue to make important and unique contributions to our national fabric.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a happy National Acadian Day.

I am deeply saddened that 18 people, including Canadians Tammy Chen and Bilel Diffalah, were killed during a terrorist attack on a popular restaurant in downtown Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. Those lost include women and children, and people of many nationalities and backgrounds, who should have felt safe gathering together to share a meal.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I offer our condolences to the families and friends of those killed and wish a speedy recovery to all those injured.
Canada strongly condemns this heinous attack. People should not have to live in fear over their safety and security – no matter where they call home or where they travel. We will continue to work closely with the international community to fight terrorism and bring those responsible to justice.
These cowardly acts seek to instill fear and divide us. In the face of hatred, we must stand united in the values of diversity, openness, and inclusion.

I am deeply saddened by today’s terrorist attack in Barcelona that has killed and injured so many innocent people.
Sophie and I join all Canadians in offering our sincere condolences to the families and friends who have lost loved ones, and our best wishes for a fast and full recovery to those injured today.
While we cannot ignore the outrage we feel, together we must renew our commitment to protect the freedom found in societies that promote unity, openness and inclusion.
Spain, we grieve with you and denounce hate and violence in all of its forms. Canada will continue working with the international community to fight terrorism and build a world where we can all feel safe and secure.

It was with great sadness that I learned today that one Canadian was killed and four others injured during yesterday’s cowardly terrorist attack in Barcelona. Sophie and I offer our condolences to the families and friends in mourning, and hope for a speedy recovery for the injured Canadians.
We join Spain and countries around the world in grieving the senseless loss of so many innocent people. We must stand firm against the spread of hate and intolerance in all its forms. These violent acts that seek to divide us will only strengthen our resolve.

75 years ago to this day, almost 5,000 Canadian soldiers, together with their British and American allies, landed in occupied France, on the shores around the town of Dieppe. Today, we remember the Canadians who sacrificed greatly in this dramatic chapter of the Second World War.
The soldiers were there to test German defences and gather important intelligence, but the raid ended in tragedy. After nine hours, pinned down under enemy fire, the Allies withdrew. Only 2,210 Canadians returned to Great Britain, many of whom were wounded. Nearly 2,000 were taken as prisoners of war, most remaining in captivity until the end of the conflict. In total, 916 Canadians were killed in the operation.
Despite these brutal losses, the Canadians showed extraordinary heroism that day. Honorary Captain John Weir Foote of the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry braved enemy bullets to bring wounded soldiers to first aid posts. Lieutenant Colonel Charles Cecil Merritt of the South Saskatchewan Regiment led his men in a dangerous bridge crossing, and then helped many of them to return to the beaches through a brilliant rearguard action. Both men remained behind rather than take the chance to escape. For their bravery and sacrifice, they were awarded the Victoria Cross.
The courage and steadfastness of these soldiers, and of so many others, exemplified the Canadian and Allied response after the raid. The operation at Dieppe was the most devastating day of the entire Second World War for the Canadian military. Yet it taught the Allies invaluable lessons – which, less than two years later, they used to help turn the tide of the war on D-Day.
As we commemorate the Dieppe Raid at events in Canada and France, I ask all Canadians to honour the people who gave so much at Dieppe, as well as their families at home who suffered the loss of their loved ones. Their story teaches us that our finest moments are often about overcoming challenges and defeats, rather than easy victories.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank all our veterans and those who gave their lives at Dieppe for their profound service, courage, and sacrifice.
Lest we forget.


Today, we join the United Nations in recognizing the humanitarian workers who risk their lives to protect the millions of civilians affected by crises around the world, and who uphold the humanitarian principles of neutrality, impartiality, and independence.  
Rising insecurity, poverty, and the impacts of persecution and climate change have led to incredibly complex and protracted crises globally. More people are displaced today, fleeing conflict and violence, than at any time since the Second World War.
Escalating unrest and violence have made humanitarians’ lifesaving work even more difficult and dangerous. Aid workers brave kidnapping, roadside bombs, and countless other threats. They can lack reliable access to basic amenities like electricity and running water, and suffer greater risk of exposure to infectious disease.
In the face of these challenges, humanitarians deliver vital assistance, relief, and hope to millions of people. They do so without discrimination based on race, ethnic origin, religion, sex, or any other factor – setting an example for all of us.
The people workers help are often among the world’s most vulnerable, including women and girls, who bear different and disproportionate effects of violent conflict and natural disaster. Recognizing these unequal burdens, Canada has refocused its international assistance – through the new Feminist International Assistance Policy – to promote gender equality and better assist the unique needs of women and girls in crisis situations.
Many humanitarian crises are rooted in enduring divisions and inequality. As an international community, we have a responsibility to show that diversity and inclusion are strengths – and a force that can vanquish intolerance, radicalism, and hate.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank Canadian aid workers and all those engaged in humanitarian efforts around the world. In extremely difficult circumstances, you support those in need, and stand up for the dignity and potential of all human beings.


Today, we join people in Canada and around the world to remember the victims and survivors of Communism and Nazism in Europe, and to pay tribute to all those who continue to face violence, loss of dignity, and repression from totalitarian regimes.
On Black Ribbon Day, we mark the anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, which was signed in 1939 between the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany. The infamous agreement carved Eastern and Central Europe into spheres of influence of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union, and led to one of the darkest periods in human history.
In the years that followed, the Soviet and Nazi regimes trampled upon national and personal freedoms across Europe. They robbed millions of people of their lives and livelihoods, and subjected countless men, women, and children to untold atrocities.
Many of those who struggled against the horrors of the Soviet and Nazi regimes came to Canada as refugees. These Canadians and their descendants continue to make remarkable contributions to our country. Their stories underscore the importance of universal human rights – and remind us of the fragility of freedom.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I urge Canadians to reflect on the significance of this day. We all share the responsibility to promote and protect human rights, freedom, and democracy. We must stand guard against those who seek to devalue the humanity of others, and uphold the inherent dignity of every human being.


Today, Ukrainians and Ukrainian communities in Canada and around the world celebrate 26 years of independence and freedom.
As we mark both this important occasion and 150 years since Confederation, I invite Canadians to reflect on the immeasurable contribution of the Ukrainian-Canadian community to building a diverse and inclusive Canada.
On this day, the Government of Canada reiterates its full support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as Ukraine’s ongoing efforts to advance democracy, the rule of law, and sustainable economic development. Canada looks forward to continuing to work closely with Ukraine in areas of mutual interest, including the implementation of the Canada-Ukraine Free Trade Agreement, which entered into force 
on August 1.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating a joyful Independence Day.
Slava Ukraini!

Today, Muslims in Canada and around the world will celebrate Eid al-Adha.
Eid al-Adha marks the end of the annual Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca. It is a time to reflect on lessons of sacrifice and charity, and to appreciate life’s many blessings.
To mark this special occasion, Muslims will gather with family and friends to attend morning prayers, share celebratory meals, exchange gifts and greetings, and give to those in need.  
This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, Eid al-Adha is an opportunity for us all to reflect on the important contributions the Muslim community has made to build the diverse, strong and inclusive country that we all call home.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating Eid al-Adha.
Eid Mubarak!


Canada unequivocally condemns North Korea’s? nuclear test of September 3 which, combined with its aggressive program of ballistic missile testing, represents a clear and present threat to the safety and security of its neighbours and the international community.
This most recent test, which appears to have been of a much greater magnitude than its five previous nuclear explosions, is in direct contravention of multiple UN Security Council resolutions, and? demonstrates once again North Korea’s flagrant disregard of international law.
These continued provocations by North Korea’s leadership, along with their profoundly dangerous push to develop nuclear weapons and test ballistic missiles near neighbouring countries, only serve to further isolate them.
Canada has been steadfast in insisting that North Korea abandon its current course, including its aggressive rhetoric, and asks that it resumes constructive dialogue toward a comprehensive and verifiable solution.
We urge the UN Security Council to take further decisive action to effectively constrain North Korea’s proliferation efforts, and call on all states to fully implement relevant UN sanctions.
We will continue to work with key regional partners – including the United States, South Korea and Japan – as well as the broader international community, to counter the North Korean threat.

•	
On Labour Day, we celebrate the many accomplishments of Canada’s labour movement. For more than a century, Canadians have come together to fight for a safer, more equitable, and just workplace. Their hard-won victories brought about fair wages, weekends, and paid sick days, among many other benefits and protections we take for granted today. The discipline and dedication of organized labour continue to build our country and lay the foundation for one of the strongest middle classes in the world.
Our government was elected on a promise to grow the middle class, and pave the way for more Canadians to have a real and fair chance at success. We have taken great strides to prepare Canadians for the changing economy, and create good, middle class jobs from coast-to-coast-to-coast. 
Over the past year, we introduced measures to relieve the pressures adults face when deciding to go back to school, made it easier for Canadians on EI to obtain new certificates and training, and helped hundreds of thousands of low- and middle-income students pay their tuition. We also launched the union-based apprenticeship training program, and established agreements to expand affordable, high quality child care across the country.
In the coming months, we will update laws to better support Canadian workers as they seek to balance the responsibilities of work and family. Targeted amendments to the Canada Labour Code will give federally-regulated employees the right to request more flexible work arrangements, such as the ability to work from home, and provide unpaid leave for family responsibilities.
We continue to work closely with organized labour to protect and promote workers’ rights, and affirm the vital role unions play in helping the middle class grow and prosper. We recently passed Bill C-4, restoring a fair and balanced approach to federal labour relations, and ratified the International Labour Organization’s Convention 98, recognizing workers’ right to collectively bargain. We also pledged to ban the manufacture, import, export and use of asbestos in Canada by 2018, and renewed our commitment to ensure the Westray Law is applied effectively and negligent employers are held responsible.
Organized labour has a strong partner in the Government of Canada. We will continue to stand up for the middle class and invest in Canada’s hardworking, creative, and diverse workforce. Since December 2015, Canada’s unemployment rate has dropped from 7.1 per cent to 6.3 per cent. In the last year, the Canadian economy has created almost 400,000 new jobs. Today, we celebrate Canada’s workers and labour movement who made this progress possible.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all Canadians a safe and happy Labour Day. 


Today, on the first annual Firefighters’ National Memorial Day, we take a moment to remember those who have answered their last alarm.
We solemnly honour Canada’s more than 1,300 firefighters who have died in the line of duty since the first recorded fatality in 1848, including the 13 who have died this year. We mourn them with their loved ones, friends and colleagues.
There can be no greater gesture than to put oneself in harm’s way to save the life of another. We must never forget the enormous risks our firefighters face to keep us safe, or the sacrifices they and their families are called upon to make.
In particular, I want to offer our sincere gratitude for the efforts of the firefighters who having been fighting the 2017 wildfires in British Columbia, and of those who tackled the 2016 blaze in Fort McMurray, Alberta.
Firefighting is fraught with danger, and that includes emotional and mental stress. We recognize the toll this work takes on the lives of firefighters and those close to them.
The Government of Canada is committed to supporting the women and men who risk their lives to keep Canadians safe. Budget 2017 includes an investment of $80 million over five years, starting in 2018-19, and $20 million thereafter, for the establishment of a grant program to support the families of all public safety officers – firefighters, police and paramedics – who made the ultimate sacrifice to keep Canadians safe.
Working collaboratively with provinces, territories, first responders, and other key stakeholders, we are also developing a coordinated national action plan to address post-traumatic stress disorder and other occupational stress injuries, in support of public safety officers.
Every year from now on, to honour the service and sacrifice of Canada’s firefighters, the Canadian flag will fly at half-mast on all federal buildings and establishments — including the Peace Tower — from sunrise to sunset on the second Sunday in September.
Today, as we remember and honour the legacy of sacrifice, dedication and bravery provided by our firefighters, let us ensure that Canada forever remains a country where generosity of heart prevails, and where Canadians continue to look out for the wellbeing of those around them.


Sixteen years ago today, terrorist attacks in the United States killed nearly 3,000 innocent victims, including 24 Canadians. On this solemn anniversary, we remember the lives taken so cruelly, and we offer our deepest sympathies to their loved ones and the many who still struggle with the trauma caused by these attacks.
Today, we also honour the bravery of the first responders and countless others who put themselves in harm’s way on 9/11. We remember those who knowingly risked their lives to save others – who rushed into the rubble, who climbed the stairs of the collapsing towers, who stormed the cockpit of a hijacked plane. Their acts of heroism and sacrifice live on, through the women and men they saved, and the stories from which we continue to draw strength.
Even in the darkness of 9/11, humanity’s capacity for goodness shone through. We continue to be inspired by the people of Gander, Halifax, Vancouver and other Canadian cities who opened their hearts and their homes to stranded air travelers and crews from around the world in the aftermath of these attacks.
On this National Day of Service, I also want to thank those who continue to fight on the front lines against terrorism – women and men in uniform, the intelligence community, diplomats, and security and law enforcement professionals. They work tirelessly to keep us safe at home and abroad.
While recent events have shown that no country is immune to senseless acts of terror, we must stand united – as an international community – against violence and all acts that seek to sow fear and division. Such acts only strengthen our resolve to counter hate by promoting the values of diversity, inclusion, and peace.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage Canadians to take part in acts of service today to honour the selflessness shown by so many on 9/11.


Today, Coptic Christians in Canada and around the world will celebrate the Feast of Nayrouz, also known as the Feast of Rivers, and welcome the Coptic New Year.
Nayrouz commemorates those who were persecuted because of their faith in Egypt under Roman rule and also marks the beginning of Thout – the first month of the Coptic calendar. It is a time of renewal for Coptic Christians, who come together to exchange gifts and pray as a community.
Tracing their ancestry to the ancient Egyptians, Coptic Christians have successfully preserved their rich faith and traditions, including Nayrouz, throughout the centuries. Today, Coptic Christian communities are found around the world.
As we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation this year, I invite Canadians to reflect on the diverse faiths and cultural communities that have chosen to make this country home. Openness to different cultures, together with freedom of worship, has allowed Canada to become as diverse as it is strong.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a happy Nayrouz!


On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to congratulate the Conservative Party on their success in yesterday’s general election. This closely-contested election was a testament to the strength and dynamism of Norway’s democracy.
Canada will continue to work with the international community, including Norway, to promote democracy, good governance, and human rights, and advance initiatives that address the needs of all our citizens as they adapt to a rapidly changing world. As members of the Arctic Council, Canada and Norway also have a particular responsibility to address climate change and support sustainable development in the Arctic region.
Relations between our two countries were forged during the Second World War, when thousands of exiled Norwegian military personnel trained in Canada for the eventual liberation of their homeland. Since that time, Norway and Canada have become close economic partners and firm NATO allies. Our two countries are committed to values of equality, democracy, and human rights. Together we promote these values abroad in the UN and other organizations. Our relationship will continue to expand and develop as we face the future together.


It was with sadness that I learned last night of the death of one of Canada’s most respected leaders, former Member of Parliament, Senator and Cabinet Minister the Honourable Allan J. MacEachen.
Allan J. MacEachen – known affectionately as Allan J. – distinguished himself as a senior minister and public servant during one of the longest political careers in Canadian history. He was a true friend of my father, a great son of Cape Breton, and a peerless servant of Canada.
Allan represented his constituents while serving in various roles in the House of Commons, including as a cabinet minister, government leader, and the first deputy prime minister. In every role, Allan endeavoured to better the lives of those he served. He succeeded. He played a pivotal role to advance many landmark social issues, including old age pensions, the labour code, and minimum wage.
Of his many contributions, Allan will be most remembered as a champion of nationwide medicare. Through years of contentious deliberations, he never lost sight of an equitable health care system for Canadians. In 1966, as Minister of National Health and Welfare, he oversaw the passage of the Medical Care Act, and helped lay the foundation for a program that continues to define Canada today.
In 1984, Allan joined the Senate of Canada, serving as government and then opposition leader until he retired in 1996. In recognition of his work, he was named an Officer of the Order of Canada, and awarded the Golden and Diamond Jubilee Medal. He was also honoured with the opening of the MacEachen Institute for Public Policy and Governance at Dalhousie University – a fitting tribute for a respected parliamentarian who started his career in academics.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our sincere condolences to his family, friends, and the people of Cape Breton. Canada is a stronger and more compassionate country because of Allan’s dedicated public service and unwavering commitment to Canadians.


Canada lost one of its most devoted servants today.
I was deeply saddened to learn of the death of my close friend and colleague Arnold Chan. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to his wife, Jean; to their three sons, Nathaniel, Ethan, and Theodore; and to Arnold’s parents, brother, friends, and constituents.
Arnold was elected to serve the people of Scarborough-Agincourt in 2014. For three and a half years, he distinguished himself as a thoughtful, kind and – above all – tireless advocate for Canadians. He believed deeply in our democracy and became one of its most faithful and eloquent guardians.
Arnold accomplished all of this despite battling cancer throughout most of his time as an MP. Even at his sickest, he found the strength to stand up in the House of Commons and represent his constituents, who he cared about so deeply.
In June, Arnold delivered an impassioned speech to the House. I encourage all Canadians to take time today to listen to Arnold’s words, which hold lessons for us all. He reminds us that real democracy means listening to each other instead of talking over each other, and that our civic duty includes not just casting a ballot but taking care, in our everyday actions, of the country we are lucky to call home.
In 2015, Arnold became Deputy Leader of the Government in the House of Commons. He was a committed advocate for the Armenian-Canadian community and chaired the Canada-Armenia Parliamentary Friendship Group.
I am forever enriched by Arnold’s friendship, as Canadians are by his leadership and devoted service. He leaves us with wise words that he truly embodied: ‘We should use our heads, but follow our hearts.’


Today, we join our partners in the United Nations to celebrate the International Day of Democracy. We take the opportunity to recognize the freedoms that democracy affords us – and remind ourselves of the responsibility we all share to keep our democracy strong.
This year’s theme – Democracy and Conflict Prevention – highlights the indivisible links between peace and democracy. Canada recognizes the critical need to strengthen democratic norms and institutions around the world to promote peace and stability. In order to endure, both peace and democracy must be built through inclusive approaches that respect human rights and diversity and promote gender equality. Women and girls’ leadership and participation in political, social, and peacebuilding processes are essential to creating political systems that truly represent the voices of all members of society.
Equality is vital to a thriving democracy, and Canada reaffirms the need to work to change the severe disparities that exist in our world. To address these gaps, Canada and all UN member states adopted the ambitious 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The agenda provides a framework to eradicate poverty, protect our environment, and promote human rights. Our countries – and our world – are stronger and more peaceful when all people can make their voices heard, and when everyone’s rights are protected.
Today is also the launch of Elections Canada’s Canada’s Democracy Week, a time for all Canadians, especially young people, to get engaged in the democratic process and talk about what democracy means to them and their communities.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I call on all Canadians to get informed and involved. By using our voices as forces for positive change, we can strengthen democratic norms and institutions in Canada and help make democracy a reality for all people around the world.

I am very pleased that Member of Parliament for St. Catharines, Chris Bittle, has been appointed as the new Deputy Leader of the Government in the House of Commons.
Working closely with the Honourable Bardish Chagger, the Leader of the Government in the House of Commons, Chris Bittle will encourage close collaboration and meaningful engagement with House of Commons colleagues, Parliamentary Committees, the Public Service, stakeholders, and Canadians. He will also play an instrumental role as we work to modernize the House of Commons and make it more accountable, predictable, efficient, and transparent.
Mr. Bittle’s experience as a Member of the Standing Committee on Justice and Human Rights, its Subcommittee on Agenda and Procedure, and on two groups that promote cooperation between parties in Parliament – the Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association and the Canada-Italy Interparliamentary Group – will be invaluable in this new role. His legal background will also serve him well as we focus on effective and accountable governance that supports our long-term plan to create jobs, strengthen the middle class, and secure a more prosperous future for all Canadians.
While we look forward to welcoming our new Deputy House Leader, we also continue to mourn the passing of our dear friend and colleague, Member of Parliament Arnold Chan, who served in the role for almost two years. His commitment to Canadians, devotion to public service, and zeal for democratic values will continue to motivate and inspire us for years to come.


Today, Hindu communities in Canada and around the world will celebrate Navratri.
Navratri is one of the most important festivals for the Hindu community. It symbolizes the triumph of good over evil, and is celebrated over nine consecutive nights.
On this occasion, family and friends gather to pray, share special meals, exchange greetings, dance, and celebrate. The nine-night festival is now celebrated by Hindus and non-Hindus alike in South Asia and around the world, including in Canada.
As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I invite Canadians to reflect on the important contributions of Canada’s Hindu community to our national fabric. Canada is a stronger and more prosperous country because of its diversity.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating Navratri.


Tonight at sunset, Jewish communities in Canada and around the world will celebrate Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year.
Rosh Hashanah is celebrated on the first and second days of the month of Tishrei and marks the beginning of the Days of Awe. It is a time to reflect on the past year and look forward to the year ahead with hope and intention.
This year, Rosh Hashanah comes at a time of great anxiety for the Jewish community in Canada. We have seen hateful, anti-Semitic acts target innocent people and the places where they gather and worship. The Government of Canada stands firmly with the Jewish community in the face of this hatred and condemns all forms of racism, xenophobia, and discrimination.
In the spirit of Rosh Hashanah, I urge all Canadians to reflect on the values we hold dear as a country. What makes us strong – our openness, compassion, diversity and inclusion – is enshrined in our laws and statutes. Yet they are only meaningful when we put them into practice, through the choices we make every day. Each of us must be confident and untiring custodians of these values and do our part to repair the world.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating Rosh Hashanah a healthy, peaceful, and prosperous New Year.
Shana Tova Umetukah!


Today, we join the people of Armenia and members of the Armenian community in Canada and around the world to celebrate the anniversary of Armenia’s independence.
Canada and the Republic of Armenia enjoy a dynamic and friendly relationship, built upon shared values of justice, democracy and freedom, people-to-people connections, and our collaboration in international organizations, including La Francophonie.
Canada looks forward to continuing to work with the Republic of Armenia to further strengthen the relationship between our two countries, and to deepen our collaboration on global and regional issues, including climate change, development cooperation, trade and investment, and peace and security.
Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride. I commend the Armenian Canadian community for their generosity and leadership in welcoming thousands of newcomers from Syria. When we come together to welcome newcomers, we strengthen our communities in long-lasting and significant ways.
This year, as we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I invite Canadians to reflect on the important contributions Canadians of Armenian descent make to our national fabric.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish a happy Independence Day to all those celebrating.


This year, as we celebrate the 25th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Canada and Ukraine, we reflect on the important milestones achieved since we last met in Kyiv in July 2016.
Expanding Economic Opportunities
The entry into force of the Canada-Ukraine Free Trade Agreement (CUFTA) represents a historic moment in our bilateral relations. We are committed to working closely together to ensure that Canadians and Ukrainians alike can take advantage of the benefits of CUFTA as soon as possible.
Through the implementation of this agreement, we are looking forward to boosting bilateral trade between Ukraine and Canada in agriculture, information technology, energy and aerospace. Under CUFTA’s two-year review clause, we will examine the possibility of extending CUFTA’s coverage to additional areas, such as services and investment.
Enhancing Security Cooperation
Canada is unequivocal in its support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Canada reiterates its non-recognition of Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and continues to condemn Russian military aggression in Donbas. Canada is committed to maintaining pressure on Russia to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and to implement fully its Minsk commitments, including through ongoing sanctions.
Operation UNIFIER supports the important military training and capacity building efforts undertaken by Ukraine to maintain its sovereignty and security, while fostering a mutually-beneficial learning environment for both Canadian and Ukrainian Armed Forces.
Canada will continue to support Ukraine’s progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration and to adopt and implement NATO standards through its ambitious agenda of reforms. Canada values Ukraine’s commitment to its relationship with NATO and its significant contributions to Allied operations. Against the backdrop of shared security challenges, we reaffirm our common interest in international peace through our bilateral Defence Cooperation Arrangement (DCA) and our shared commitment to advancing Ukraine’s defence reform agenda. Canada supports Ukraine’s goal of achieving NATO interoperability by 2020, providing both tactical training and strategic advice.
Sharing Common Values

Canada shares a strong bond with Ukraine, rooted in generations of Ukrainian migration to Canada. We look forward to building on our strong people-to-people ties, including through the promotion of youth mobility, to forge new bonds between our countries for generations to come.
We recognize the strong progress made in Ukraine’s reform efforts and the launch of Agenda 2020, as well as Canada’s contribution to that progress. Sustained effort will be critical to ensuring durable institutional transformation, unblocking obstacles to reform and unlocking Ukraine’s full potential. We are guided in our efforts and in our outlook by our shared commitment to the values of inclusivity and respect for diversity.


On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to congratulate Angela Merkel and the Christian Democratic Union for winning the most votes in the German general election. Her principal challenger, Martin Schulz, led a formidable campaign. The closeness of the vote and scope of issues debated was a testament to the vibrancy of Germany’s democracy.
As the next German government takes shape, I look forward to continuing to work with Chancellor Merkel and her interim government on issues that matter to both Canadians and Germans, including international security, climate change, managed migration for those displaced due to crisis, and the implementation of the Canada-EU Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement.
Canada and Germany are bound by more than just common interests. We are compassionate societies that understand diversity is a source of strength. Our institutions aspire to show openness and respect to all people, and we share a vision of progressive, sustainable economies that benefit everyone. These values will guide us as we move forward together to face the most pressing issues of our time.


On October 2nd, 2017, His Excellency the Right Honourable David Johnston will return to private life after holding this country’s highest and oldest office. His Excellency served with the utmost dedication and dignity, remarkable intelligence, and exceptional character. He did so not for the customary term of five years, but for an extraordinary seven.
As Canada’s 28th Governor General, His Excellency brought tenacity, drive, and deep compassion to the accomplishment of his duties as the representative of our Monarch, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. He proudly served as the 11th Governor General of Canada under her reign.
Together with Her Excellency Sharon Johnston, the Governor General focused his mandate on supporting learning, innovation, and civic engagement. He advocated staunchly for education and for the needs of families and young people, worked to promote diversity and inclusion, and exemplified his belief in Canadians’ ability to create a more caring country and a more just world.
Throughout his term, His Excellency prioritized connecting with the people he served. He visited all corners of our country to do so, and represented Canadians and their values in his travels around the world. His service has left an indelible imprint on the Office of the Governor General, and shaped Canada for the better.
In recognition of his contributions and as is customary in these instances, I am proud to announce a gift to the Governor General from the Government of Canada. In his honour, the Rideau Hall Foundation – which His Excellency helped found in 2012 – will receive a $3 million grant and up to $7 million in matching funds over a 10-year period. This funding will help the Rideau Hall Foundation continue its important work to connect people, ideas, and resources. It will support initiatives that strengthen our identity, amplify the reach of the Office of the Governor General, and help build a stronger Canada.
Your Excellencies, Sophie and I thank you for all you have done in service to Canada and Canadians. Your dedication is an example for all of us. Our country is stronger because of you.


Tonight at sunset, Jewish communities in Canada and around the world will observe the beginning of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement.
Yom Kippur, which occurs on the tenth day of the month of Tishrei, is one of the holiest days in the Jewish calendar. It marks the end of the Ten Days of Awe, and is a time for introspection, repentance, and renewal.
On this sacred day, people will gather with family and friends to fast and pray, reflect on the past year, and look forward with hope and renewed purpose to the year ahead. For all of us, Yom Kippur is a chance to reflect on our values and recommit ourselves to putting them into practice.
This year, we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation – an opportunity to honour the many cultures, traditions, and beliefs that make Canada such a wonderful place to live. Jewish Canadians as individuals and as a community have greatly contributed to Canada’s success over the last 150 years and continue to play an important role in all aspects of Canadian life.
For many people in the Jewish community in Canada, Yom Kippur comes at a time of anxiety this year, in the wake of recent hateful, anti-Semitic acts. The Government of Canada stands firmly with the Jewish community in the face of this hatred. We will continue to work to counter anti-Semitism, racism, and hatred in all its forms, and to build a more inclusive Canada.
On behalf of our entire family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to the Jewish community and all those observing Yom Kippur.
G’mar Chatimah Tovah.


The Government of Canada and Canadians stand with the people of Edmonton after the terrorist attack on Saturday that sent an Edmonton Police Service officer to hospital and injured a number of innocent people who were out to cheer on their football team and to enjoy an evening in their city. I am deeply concerned and outraged by this tragedy.
Our thoughts are with those injured, their family and friends, and all those affected by this senseless act of violence. I am also grateful for the first responders who were there on the scene, and the enforcement authorities who have been working through the night to make sure that everybody in Edmonton and Alberta is safe and secure. Police officers put themselves at great personal risk every single day on our behalf, and this attack is a stark reminder of the sacrifices they make for the public good.
While the investigation continues, early reports indicate that this is another example of the hate that we must remain ever vigilant against. The RCMP and the Edmonton Police Service, through the Integrated National Enforcement Team, are working closely together to bring those involved to justice.
We cannot – and will not – let violent extremism take root in our communities. We know that Canada’s strength comes from our diversity, and we will not be cowed by those who seek to divide us or promote fear. Edmonton is a strong and resilient city, and I am confident that its citizens will support one another to overcome this tragic event.

Throughout our history, women have played a foundational role to shape the strong, dynamic, open country we all call home. During Women’s History Month, we celebrate the outstanding achievements of women and their remarkable contributions to our country.
In Canada and around the world, women have been powerful agents of change throughout history, and they continue to make a difference in communities everywhere. From the sciences to the arts, business to government, women have made major contributions to every field imaginable. Women’s leadership has been essential to advancing social justice and human rights everywhere, and has helped to create a better, more equal world for all of us.
This year’s Women’s History Month theme – Claim Your Place – is a call to action, reminding us that we must continue to honour women’s achievements, and to push for progress on gender equality and inclusion. While we have made tremendous progress over the past 150 years, we have much more work to do. Sexism, discrimination, and gender-based violence are still a part of daily life for too many women in Canada and around the world. This is unacceptable – and it is up to all of us to build a world where all people, no matter their gender identity, have the same opportunities, where women’s rights are respected, and where their voices are heard.
Our Government is working hard to advance gender equality and ensure that all people, no matter their gender, have the opportunity to realize their full potential. We are working to strengthen women’s leadership in business and government and to provide young women with the opportunities they need to advance their careers. With our Feminist International Assistance Policy, we made empowering women and girls the focus of our international aid. We also recognize that women continue to bear a disproportionate responsibility for family care, and our enhanced support for families – from the Canada Child Benefit, to improved access to funding so parents can go back to work or back to school – responds to this reality. We are proud of the steps we have taken, and we will continue to make advancing gender equality a priority.
This month, and throughout the year, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to join us in celebrating the courageous women – past and present – who have shaped our country. Trailblazing women have helped make Canada what it is today. Every day, women build on that history, and continue to shape our world for the better.


On National Seniors Day, we celebrate seniors across Canada and honour their invaluable contributions to our country. Canada’s seniors hold a unique and cherished place within our families, our workplaces, and our communities.
Seniors have a lasting and life-changing impact on us all. They raise and mentor succeeding generations, pass on important lessons, and help us learn to care for our world and each other. They take care of us as we grow, help us through the hard moments, and celebrate with us in good times. Canada’s seniors make a difference in all our lives, and contribute each day to making our country stronger, more open, and more inclusive.
Our Government recognizes the pivotal role seniors play in the wellbeing of our whole country. We are working hard to ensure they have the support they need and the secure and dignified retirement they deserve. We strengthened the Canada Pension Plan, increased the Guaranteed Income Supplement for the lowest-income single seniors, and restored the age of eligibility for the Old Age Security benefits from 67 to 65. We also created the Canada Caregiver Credit to provide better support to those who need it most and help families take care of their loved ones. We are also investing in home care and housing for seniors so more seniors can get the care and support they need in their communities. Whether in housing, health care, or income security, we will continue to help Canadian seniors get the support they need to participate in their communities and enjoy a secure and dignified retirement.
Seniors carry stories that help us understand who we are as a country, and knowledge that helps us better contribute to our communities. As workers, volunteers, and members of our families and communities, they help build a stronger Canada and a better world.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to say thank you and recognize a senior in their life – a parent, grandparent, or mentor – for everything they contribute to Canadian society. Their past and present continue to help create a better future for all of us.


It is my honour to welcome, on behalf of all Canadians, Canada’s 29th Governor General, Her Excellency the Right Honourable Julie Payette.
In welcoming Her Excellency, we also honour Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, the Queen of Canada. This is the 12th Governor General whose appointment was made by Her Majesty during her 65 year reign. We honour her commitment to ensuring that this office is held by an individual who represents the best of our country.
Many Canadians already know much of the story of Her Excellency’s life – a story that testifies to her talent and drive, and marks her as a truly exceptional Canadian. Her Excellency flew two missions to space, was Chief Astronaut for the Canadian Space Agency, and proudly carried the Olympic flag during the opening ceremonies of the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics. As the second Canadian woman in space and only the fourth woman Governor General, Her Excellency has been and continues to be a trailblazer and an inspiration for all of us.
Her Excellency’s knowledge, determination, and curiosity about the world around her led her to achieve her dreams – and in doing so, she showed a whole country that their dreams were within reach, too. Her Excellency’s achievements are a testament to her hard work, discipline, and passion, and her work has been recognized with many distinctions and 27 honorary doctorates. As an astronaut, engineer, scientific broadcaster, and corporate director, Her Excellency has proven herself to be a tireless and respected leader, a team player, and a powerful agent of change.
Above all, Her Excellency represents the very best of what it means to be Canadian. She embodies dedicated service and a commitment to integrity. In her new role, she will continue to do vital work to promote our unique Canadian identity. She will travel to communities across the country to discuss with Canadians the issues that matter to them and to honour those who demonstrate exceptional service to their communities and our world.
As Commander-in-Chief, she will help highlight the importance of Canada’s military and the selfless sacrifices of its members and their families. Her Excellency will also represent Canada while visiting and hosting international dignitaries, to further strengthen our links with countries and people around the world.
This has been an important year for Canada. The 150th anniversary of Confederation has given us an opportunity to reflect on our past and present, as well as on our dreams and aspirations for our future. Her Excellency will help us realize these shared hopes for tomorrow. Her life has already inspired so many to dream big, push boundaries, and explore what exists beyond the here and now. I have no doubt that she will excel at representing this wonderful country and continue to inspire countless Canadians in her new role.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank Her Excellency for accepting this call to service. We look forward to seeing her fulfill her mandate while engaging Canadians on our path forward and promoting the values that make this country strong.
I also join all Canadians to again extend our sincere gratitude to the Right Honourable David Johnston and Mrs. Sharon Johnston for their service over the past seven years. Their grace, dedication, and humility will continue to inspire us.

Our hearts break for our American friends and neighbours today. On behalf of all Canadians, I offer my deepest condolences to those who lost loved ones and friends, and my prayers for a fast and full recovery for the many injured.
We stand with the United States, and share their pain and horror at such a senseless and cowardly act of violence.
Las Vegas has long been celebrated by people from around the globe, including many Canadians. We grieve with this city and the United States. Such acts only strengthen our resolve to stand together, united.
This city is a destination for people from around the world, and we are following up on reports of Canadian victims. Consular officials are in close contact with local authorities.

Friends and relatives of Canadian citizens known to be in the area can contact Global Affairs Canada's 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre by calling 613-996-8885 or 1-800-387-3124, or by sending an email to sos@international.gc.ca.

Today, I join Canadians of Chinese, Korean, Japanese, and Vietnamese heritage to celebrate the Mid-Autumn Festival.
Also known as the Moon Festival, the Mid-Autumn Festival is celebrated on the 15th day of the eighth month of the lunar calendar, when the moon is at its fullest and brightest. It symbolizes a good harvest, and is a time to give thanks for the year’s successes.
On this occasion, families and loved ones join together to light lanterns, exchange greetings and gifts, and share mooncakes. The festival is also a moment to celebrate the round moon, which represents family unity.
Canada is a stronger and more prosperous country because of its diversity. As we mark the 150th anniversary of Confederation, we continue to honour the many cultures and communities that make Canada such a wonderful place to live.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a happy Mid-Autumn Festival.


Today, we join the international community to celebrate teachers. On World Teachers’ Day, we honour the work teachers and educators do to shape our communities and our world for the better.
Teachers are compassionate, curious, and constantly seek new ways to solve challenges and explain complex issues. They understand that more important than having all the answers is listening to the needs of their students – and they work tirelessly to empower students to find the answers and take ownership of their own path. Above all, teachers help their students walk away from the classroom with respect for others and for themselves. They know that the world will be shaped by the students they teach – and they have an extraordinary impact on that world, every day, in the classroom.
This year’s theme –Teaching in Freedom, Empowering Teachers – highlights the significant part teachers can play to make the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals a reality. When teachers have the freedom and support they need to help students realize their full potential, whole societies benefit from greater prosperity and stronger democracy.
Canada is working to advance Sustainable Development Goal 4 – lifelong learning and inclusive, quality education for all. In Budget 2017, we increased access to funding so that adults can more easily go back to school. We are also investing in child care, including in training and support for early childhood educators. Last year, we also created a tax benefit for teachers and early childhood educators, which gives teachers important support to help their students succeed. With our Feminist International Assistance Policy, we are promoting equal educational opportunities for women and girls around the world. We are also investing in Canadian schools and in Indigenous education across the country.
I am exceptionally proud to have been a teacher, and I have tremendous respect for the work teachers do every day. That is why I am pleased to launch the nomination period for this year’s Prime Minister’s Awards for Teaching Excellence and Excellence in Early Childhood Education. These awards recognize exemplary teachers who are preparing the next generation for success in our changing economy. This year, we are including 17 new awards that will recognize inspirational Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) teachers, who are encouraging the innovation that will drive Canada forward today and tomorrow. I encourage all Canadians to honour teachers who are making a real difference and nominate them for the awards.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank all teachers and educators in Canada and around the world for helping us succeed as individuals and prosper as societies. You give the very best of yourselves, and change lives, every day, for the better.


Today, Canadians across the country will celebrate Thanksgiving – a day to gather with family and friends and give thanks for the many blessings we enjoy in our lives.
Thanksgiving is a time to celebrate the harvest, and a chance to appreciate the many people who contribute every day to our communities. We honour our service members, who courageously and selflessly defend our country’s fundamental values of justice, democracy, and freedom. We also give thanks for the people who work each day to change our lives for the better. People across Canada contribute in thousands of ways to keep us healthy and safe, and to make our communities stronger and more open.
This holiday also reminds us that many people, in Canada and around the world, do not share equally in the benefits we enjoy. Thanksgiving asks us to remember those less fortunate, and to show compassion to those in need – not only today, but every day.
This year, as we mark 150 years of Confederation, we recognize the countless people and communities who help make Canada strong, inclusive, and prosperous. As we give thanks for our blessings, let us look for new ways to give generously of ourselves, too. All of our actions, no matter how small, have an impact on the world – and each of us has a role to play to change our world for the better.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish everyone a very happy Thanksgiving.


Today Canadians and people around the world reflect on the central role that mental health plays in our lives. On World Mental Health Day, we raise awareness about how to better address the mental health issues that affect us, our loved ones, our workplaces, and our communities.
Mental health is a vital part of our overall wellbeing, and everyone deserves access to the mental health care and support they need. Today is a chance to celebrate the people who are working to make mental health care a reality around the world – and a reminder that all of us have a role to play to fight stigma and create cultures where we can talk openly about mental health. We also recognize the importance of the lived experience of those directly affected by a mental health issue, and of their loved ones. Their stories and voices must be at the core of efforts to improve mental health care for all.
This year’s theme – Mental Health in the Workplace – reminds us that for many people, work can be a source of stress and lead to mental health challenges. It is up to all of us to create workplaces that promote mental health and respond to employees’ diverse needs. As an employer, the government is working to ensure workplaces are healthy and safe. We also recognize that women face particular challenges in the workplace, and bear a disproportionate responsibility for mental health care. We all benefit when women participate fully in our economy and our communities, and we must do more to build workplaces that are free of discrimination, and safe and healthy for people of all gender identities.
Canada has made important advances in mental health care, and our Government is committed to continue to promote care, support, and services. Budget 2017 includes $5 billion over 10 years to support mental health initiatives across Canada – the first time the federal government has prioritized mental health in health agreements with provinces and territories. Last week, we launched a new suicide prevention strategy for our active service members and veterans, to make sure we are providing them with the best care possible. We are making major investments in housing and in jobs and skills training – because access to safe, adequate, and affordable housing and a well-paying job are critical factors in our health, both physical and mental. Budget 2017 also pledges over $200 million over the next five years to increase support for mental health services for First Nations and Inuit, building on Indigenous-led initiatives.
Today, I especially want to thank all those who have shared their stories and experiences around mental health – including my mother, Margaret. Their courage and openness have helped to fight stigma and made it easier for us to talk openly about mental health. Together, we can build on their efforts, and support the mental health of Canadians for generations to come.


Today, we celebrate girls everywhere. International Day of the Girl draws attention to the importance of girls’ rights, and shines a light on the power of girls around the world.
There are over one billion girls in the world. Each one has the potential to shape our world for the better – and each one has a right to live, learn, and work without fear of discrimination or violence, to pursue her life goals, and to reach her full potential. Girls make our communities stronger – and all of us benefit when all people, no matter their gender identity, are able to dream without limits.
This year’s United Nations theme – EmPOWER Girls: Before, during and after crises – marks the beginning of a year-long effort to address the challenges girls face before, during, and after crises. Girls experience different and disproportionate effects of crises, and we must work globally to respond to this reality.
Our world has made important progress to advance girls’ rights – but we have much further to go to make sure the rights of girls everywhere are respected and protected. In Canada and around the world, far too many girls are subjected to sexual and gender-based violence, and struggle to get the quality education, health care, and economic opportunities they need. All of us have the power – and the responsibility – to work together to break down the barriers girls face, and to help girls make their voices heard.
Everyone benefits when women and girls can participate freely and fully in our economies and societies, and advancing girls’ rights is a top priority for our Government. Canada’s Feminist International Assistance Policy makes empowering women and girls a focus in all our international aid.
At home, we are supporting schools and early childhood education, health care, and jobs and skills training – and these investments help girls and young women get the support and opportunities they need. We are also encouraging young women’s leadership, including on the Prime Minister’s Youth Council. Young women make up more than half of the council, where they have a strong voice in issues that matter to them and to our country.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I ask Canadians to join us to celebrate the power of girls. Girls in Canada and around the world are building a better future for all of us – and all of us have a role to play to help them succeed and thrive.

This week is Small Business Week, a time to celebrate and thank Canada’s small and medium sized businesses for their immense contributions to our country’s prosperity. It is also an opportunity for current and aspiring entrepreneurs to connect, share experiences, and learn new ways to make their businesses even more successful.
Small business owners move Canada forward. They invest in our communities, transform new ideas into market-ready products and services, and unlock economic opportunities that create jobs and grow the middle class.
Small businesses are the backbone of our economy. They make up 98 per cent of all business operations in Canada, employ over 70 per cent of the total labour force in the private sector, and contribute more than 30 per cent to our gross domestic product.
We know that when small businesses prosper, so does Canada. That is why Budget 2017 introduced the Innovation and Skills Plan to remove barriers and help small and medium sized businesses reach new markets, and to ensure that they have the technology, talent, and tools they need to thrive, grow, and prosper. That is also why we have been meeting with small businesses and listening to their feedback as we work toward making Canada’s tax system more fair and competitive.
Today, I joined Ministers Morneau and Chagger to announce that the Government intends to lower the small business tax rate to ten per cent in 2018 and to nine per cent in 2019. These tax cuts will fulfill a promise we made to Canada’s small business owners and, more importantly, make sure that they can keep more of their hard-earned money to invest back into their businesses, their employees, and their communities.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to participate in events across the country to celebrate Small Business Week. I thank the Business Development Bank of Canada for their annual organization of this special week and wish them every success with this year’s activities.


Today, we celebrate Persons Day, a turning point for women’s rights in Canada. On this day in 1929, women were finally recognized as ‘persons’ and won the right to be appointed to the Senate.
Five determined women from Alberta won this groundbreaking victory that defined the future of our country. Emily Murphy, Nellie McClung, Irene Parlby, Louise McKinney, and Henrietta Muir Edwards – known as the Famous Five – fought for two years to expand women’s rights and extend the reach of their voices. In its final decision, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council of Great Britain, Canada’s highest court of appeal at that time, rightly noted that ‘the exclusion of women from all public offices is a relic of days more barbarous than ours.’ With those words, democracy in Canada took a major step forward.
The Famous Five were trailblazers for social justice. Their victory was one of many milestones in the push for gender equality and for a more just world. Thanks to their efforts, and to those of many others, we have made important progress – but we have much more work to do to make gender equality a reality in Canada and around the world.
It is unacceptable that women and girls around the world do not have the same opportunities as men and boys, and struggle to receive the recognition they deserve. All of us benefit when the rights of women and girls are protected, and their voices are heard – and each of us has a role to play to build a truly gender equal world.
That is why gender equality is a priority that drives all of our actions as a Government. It is why we are working to strengthen women’s leadership in our own Cabinet and our appointment process, while facilitating new opportunities more broadly in business and government. It is why we have committed to implement pay equity legislation, and why we have made empowering women and girls the focus of our international assistance policy. Women’s voices matter, women’s rights are human rights, and all of us are affected by the challenges we face as a world. To meet those challenges, we must ensure that all people – no matter their gender identity – feel empowered to speak up and be active in all areas of our society.
On Persons Day, we pay tribute to five women who fought to make us a more inclusive and equal country. Their work paved the way for subsequent generations to continue their push for equality and justice. It is up to all of us, no matter our gender identity, to carry on their important work and make gender equality a reality in Canada and around the world.

For almost five decades, Gord Downie uncovered and told the stories of Canada. He was the frontman of one of Canada’s most iconic bands, a rock star, artist, and poet whose evocative lyrics came to define a country.
The Tragically Hip’s music invited us to explore places we had never been – from Mistaken Point to Churchill – and helped us understand each other, while capturing the complexity and vastness of the place we call home.
Gord’s command of language was profound. He painted landscapes with his words, elevating Canadian geography, historical figures, and myths. When he spoke, he gave us goosebumps and made us proud to be Canadian. Our identity and culture are richer because of his music, which was always raw and honest – like Gord himself.
In the wake of his diagnosis, Gord only fought harder for what he believed in: social justice, environmentalism, and reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples. Before passing, he shined his light on the story of 12-year-old Chanie Wenjack who died from hunger and exposure after trying to find his way home from a residential school. For his work raising awareness of Indigenous issues, he was inducted as a member of the Order of Canada in 2017.
Gord did not rest from working for the issues he cared about, and his commitment and passion will continue to motivate Canadians for years to come.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to Gord’s family, friends, bandmates and crew members, and his many, many fans. He will be sorely missed.


Today, students across Canada and around the world will gather to mark Global Dignity Day.
Every person has the potential to transform the world around them for the better. No matter our age, sexual orientation, gender identity, or background, we all deserve to lead a dignified life.   
The Global Dignity movement inspires young people to be their best selves, and reminds us all of our value, worth, and potential. The challenges we face as individuals are as unique as we are. Today is an opportunity to celebrate those who stand up for their rights and convictions, despite these challenges and because of them.
Young people everywhere are making a difference. They are willing to lead, and as courageous as they are curious. Their passion and openness push us further and faster on the path toward a more just, equal, and sustainable world.
As one of Global Dignity’s National Role Models, I encourage Canadians to promote dignity for all, not only today, but every day. As the preamble to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states, ‘recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice, and peace in the world.’
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite Canadians to participate in Global Dignity Day events across the country. I thank the Global Dignity Organization and its partners for organizing this special day and congratulate everyone involved.


Today Hindu, Sikh, Jain, and Buddhist communities in Canada and around the world celebrate Diwali and Bandi Chhor Divas. It is a time to celebrate the triumph of good over evil, and the power of knowledge and hope to dispel ignorance and despair.
Diwali brings people together from diverse communities in a spirit of respect and inclusion. This year’s celebration feels especially meaningful, on the 150th anniversary of Confederation and the 35th anniversary of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
Diversity is our greatest strength. Today, let us take the time to recognize the invaluable contributions that Hindu, Sikh, Jain, and Buddhist Canadians make to our country every day.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish a joyful Diwali and Bandi Chhor Divas to all those celebrating.


I would like to congratulate the Labour Party’s leader, Jacinda Ardern, on forming the next government of New Zealand. I look forward to working very closely with Ms. Ardern. We have the opportunity to bring our two countries even closer together as we tackle the common issues that face both Canadians and New Zealanders.
Whether it is addressing climate change or deepening trade relationships that create real benefits for everyone, Canada and New Zealand have a great deal to share and learn from each other. We already cooperate closely at the United Nations, the Commonwealth, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum, and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional Forum, and we will continue to look for new opportunities to make our relationship even stronger.

I learned with great sadness today that one of Canada’s most devoted and longest-serving public servants has passed away.
Michael joined the public service in 1959. Over the next fifty years, he would serve Canadians in a variety of roles, most notably as Secretary to the Cabinet, as Clerk to the Privy Council, and as the Senator for Ottawa-Vanier. He remains the youngest ever Canadian to lead the public service.
His contributions to Canadian public life are far-reaching and enduring. Throughout his career, Michael challenged the status quo, knowing Canadians could be better served by their federal government and public service. He oversaw the introduction of new Cabinet committee systems and government processes, many of which continue to shape government decision-making today. He also helped lay the foundation for a more efficient, modern public service – now considered the best in the world.
Michael played a pivotal role in the patriation of the Constitution and the establishment of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. He was a tireless advocate of bilingualism and national unity whose leadership helped bring us closer as a country and make our democracy uniquely our own.
On a personal level, I will remember Michael as a family friend, who was especially dear to my father and our family.
In 1982, Michael joined the Senate of Canada, sitting as an independent until his retirement in 2010. In recognition of his work, he was appointed Federal Queen’s Counsel, Commander of the Royal Victorian Order, and made a member of the Queen’s Privy Council.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to his three children, Caroline, Tom, and Kate, and to all of Michael’s family and friends.

Three years ago today, a senseless attack at the National War Memorial and Parliament Hill in Ottawa claimed the life of ceremonial honour guard Corporal Nathan Cirillo and injured several others.  
On this solemn anniversary, I join Canadians across the country to remember and pay tribute to Corporal Cirillo and to Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent, who was killed two days earlier that year in a terrorist attack in Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, Quebec. We offer our deepest sympathies to their families and friends, and to all those affected by these attacks.
Today, we also honour the bravery of the first responders – the Senate Protective Service and the House of Commons Security Services, the RCMP, former House of Commons Sergeant-at-Arms Kevin Vickers, and medical personnel – who kept us safe on that tragic day.
These attacks were intended to instill fear and divide Canadians. Instead, they only served to unite us. We emerged stronger than before, showing the world that our most cherished values – freedom, democracy, diversity, and inclusion – will always triumph over fear and hatred.
As we mourn today the loss of these two members of the Canadian Armed Forces, I invite all Canadians to thank our courageous men and women in uniform – both here at home and abroad – who put their lives in harm’s way every day to defend our country and keep us safe.

Today, we join the Bahá’í community in Canada and around the world to celebrate the 200th anniversary of the birth of Baha’u’llah, the prophet and founder of the Bahá’í faith.
Baha’u’llah’s teachings aim to inspire respect, as well as to promote diversity and inclusion, gender equality, and education for all – values that we hold dear as a country.
Canada’s diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride. This year, as we celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation, I invite all Canadians to reflect on how they can put into practice these values of openness and respect.    
Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating this historic milestone for the Bahá’í faith. 

On behalf of the Government of Canada, I congratulate Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on his victory in yesterday’s general election in Japan.
Canada and Japan are close partners with deep ties and shared values. We are both dynamic, prosperous democracies with citizens eager to thrive in the global economy.
I look forward to continue working closely with Prime Minister Abe on a progressive trade agenda that will create good, middle class jobs on both sides of the Pacific and make it easier for Canadian and Japanese businesses to trade goods and services with one another.
We will continue our close cooperation on security and defence, including measures to press North Korea to halt its nuclear and ballistic missile tests, which pose serious threats to international peace and security.
Canada and Japan understand that many of the challenges we face as countries, we face as a world. We collaborate closely as members of the G7, the United Nations, and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum. We are united in the fight against climate change, and will continue to face pressing global issues together.

Never before has the world been so interconnected. As more and more people are connected, so are the challenges we face. Challenges, such as climate change, do not recognize borders. They threaten all of our futures, no matter where we call home.
Since its inception, the United Nations (UN) has played an invaluable role in bringing the international community together to face these challenges, promote peace and human rights, and drive social progress around the world.
Canada has a storied past working to make the UN a stronger and more effective institution. Canadian leadership helped draft the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, resolve the Suez Canal crisis, and lay the foundation for peacekeeping missions. As UN peacekeepers, thousands of Canadians have put their lives on the line to protect those most vulnerable.
Today, Canada continues to work closely with the UN to meet the challenges of the 21st century. When I addressed the UN General Assembly last month, I made clear that Canada is committed to implementing the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) at home and abroad.
The achievement of the SDGs hinges on delivering economic growth that benefits everyone, empowering women and achieving gender equality, and taking ambitious action on climate change. We have a responsibility to future generations to not only achieve these goals, but to do so in a way that leaves no one behind.
On this day, I invite Canadians to reflect on all that the UN has accomplished for humanity, and celebrate the employees of its many affiliated programmes, funds, and specialized agencies who work tirelessly every day toward a better world.

I am deeply grieved to hear of today’s terrorist attack in New York City. Canadians join me in offering our sincere condolences to those mourning the loss of family members and friends. We also send our wishes for a full recovery to those who were injured.
New York is known for its resilience and strength, and we know that New Yorkers will stand together as they always have in the face of difficult situations.
Tonight, we offer our prayers and thoughts to our neighbours in the United States. We are with you, as always, as friends and allies.
Today, I had the honour of meeting with the Modern Treaty and Self-Governing First Nations to celebrate and reinforce our unique and enduring relationship.
We know that our national journey to reconciliation requires systemic changes that recognize the right to advance self-determination and self-government. Modern treaties and self-government agreements are examples of reconciliation in action.
Today, we talked about the strides taken toward self-determination, and our shared desire to ensure Indigenous governments continue to thrive for the benefit of Indigenous communities and all Canadians. We know that we need to speak openly and honestly about our common goals so we can find solutions that respond to the specific needs and circumstances of different peoples and different communities.
I was inspired to hear from Indigenous governments taking concrete steps to manage their lands and resources, and to promote the social and economic health and sustainability of their communities. This work greatly benefits their communities and the country as a whole.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I thank the Modern Treaty and Self-Government partners for meeting today under the shared desire to build a better future for our children and grandchildren. Working together, we will continue to forge a new government-to-government relationship built on recognition of rights, respect, collaboration, and partnership.

On this day, we join Sikh communities in Canada and around the world to celebrate the birth of Guru Nanak Dev Ji, founder of Sikhism.
Guru Nanak Dev Ji fought against discrimination and prejudice, and preached a message of ‘equality for all,’ regardless of religion, background, or gender.
His teachings of unity and openness are just as relevant today. They remind us that diversity is a strength, and that all of us have a role to play to make our world more just and inclusive.
Today, Sikh Canadians continue to honour and uphold these important values, and their contributions help make Canada a stronger country and a better place.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I offer our warmest wishes to everyone celebrating the anniversary of the birth of Guru Nanak Dev Ji.

I am saddened that so many have been killed and injured in a senseless and horrific act of violence against innocent people in Texas.
On behalf of all Canadians, I extend my deepest condolences to the families and friends of those killed. We also hope for a speedy recovery to all those harmed today.
It is appalling that this act took place in a place of worship, where worshippers should have felt safe.
Canada as a nation stands in solidarity with the United States during this difficult time.

Today, we mark the 100th anniversary of the end of the Battle of Passchendaele. On this solemn anniversary, we honour the thousands of Canadians who fought and died there, and pay tribute to their great courage and sacrifice.
The Battle of Passchendaele has come to be a symbol of the worst horrors of the First World War. It began in the summer of 1917, as Allied soldiers sought to open a path through Western Belgium to coastal enemy bases. For months, Allies and enemies alike fought in conditions many described as a living hell; a landscape already broken by years of warfare; mud that swallowed men and horses, but refused to bury the dead.
The Canadians joined the battle in October of that year. For weeks, they endured incessant rain and shellfire – but by mid-November, they had taken the ridge.
Our soldiers fought an impossible fight with perseverance, valour, and commitment to a greater cause. Nine Canadians would earn the Victoria Cross for their bravery. Yet the battle came at a devastating cost. 16,000 Canadians were killed or wounded – and thousands of families forever changed.
On this solemn anniversary, we honour the great heroism and sacrifice of those who fought in the Battle of Passchendaele. Tomorrow, please pause to remember and honour those who have served, and continue to serve, so that we may live in peace.
Lest we forget.

Today, we mark the 100th anniversary of the end of the Battle of Passchendaele. On this solemn anniversary, we honour the thousands of Canadians who fought and died there, and pay tribute to their great courage and sacrifice.
The Battle of Passchendaele has come to be a symbol of the worst horrors of the First World War. It began in the summer of 1917, as Allied soldiers sought to open a path through Western Belgium to coastal enemy bases. For months, Allies and enemies alike fought in conditions many described as a living hell; a landscape already broken by years of warfare; mud that swallowed men and horses, but refused to bury the dead.
The Canadians joined the battle in October of that year. For weeks, they endured incessant rain and shellfire – but by mid-November, they had taken the ridge.
Our soldiers fought an impossible fight with perseverance, valour, and commitment to a greater cause. Nine Canadians would earn the Victoria Cross for their bravery. Yet the battle came at a devastating cost. 16,000 Canadians were killed or wounded – and thousands of families forever changed.
On this solemn anniversary, we honour the great heroism and sacrifice of those who fought in the Battle of Passchendaele. Tomorrow, please pause to remember and honour those who have served, and continue to serve, so that we may live in peace.
Lest we forget.

Today, we join Polish communities in Canada and around the world to celebrate Poland’s Independence Day.
Nearly one million people of Polish descent live in Canada. Our two countries share a lasting bond based on close people-to-people links, common values, and mutual respect.
Poland and Canada fought together as allies during the Second World War. Today, we work together within multilateral organizations such as the United Nations and NATO, and are partners in progressive trade thanks to the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement. Our ongoing cooperation is based on mutual respect for democracy and human rights.
Last week, we celebrated the 150th anniversary of the first sitting of the House of Commons. That also marked the first time a Polish Canadian, Alexandre-Edouard Kierzkowski, was elected to our House of Commons.
As we continue to mark 150 years of Confederation, we celebrate the many cultures and communities that make Canada such a great place to live. Polish Canadians continue to help make Canada the strong, vibrant, and inclusive country it is today.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating Poland’s Independence Day.


This week, we celebrate Global Entrepreneurship Week, a time for entrepreneurs, innovators, investors, and collaborators from around the world to connect, share ideas, and get inspired.
Entrepreneurs grow our economy, build a strong middle class, and create good, well-paying jobs for people across Canada and around the world. On Global Entrepreneurship Week, we celebrate their creativity, hard work, and vital contributions to our communities and economy. Canada’s innovators are people of every gender, age, and background. They drive progress and prosperity in every sector and industry, and shape a better future for all of us.
The Government is working hard to help Canadian entrepreneurs turn their ideas into thriving businesses and create good jobs. We know that a skilled and entrepreneurial workforce is critical to drive economic growth in Canada. With Budget 2017, we made important investments in innovation, young entrepreneurs, and skills training to help both workers and businesses succeed in a changing economy.
Last month, we announced that we intend to lower the small business tax rate to ten per cent in 2018 and to nine per cent in 2019. These tax cuts will help small business owners keep more of their hard-earned money to invest back into their businesses, their employees, and their communities. With our plan to promote a creative Canada, we are also making important investments to support Canada’s cultural entrepreneurs – and our progressive trade agreements are helping to support innovation, open new markets, and create opportunities for Canada’s entrepreneurs.
We are also working hard to help women entrepreneurs succeed, both in Canada and abroad. The Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC) has made major investments to support women-owned businesses, recently surpassing targets with over $800 million in loans for women entrepreneurs over 30 months. As part of its efforts, the BDC has also invested $50 million in women-led technology firms. To help make sure women entrepreneurs in every part of the world have the tools they need to innovate and prosper, Canada has also pledged $20 million to the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative. We know that women entrepreneurs create jobs, advance gender equality, and help build economies that work for everyone.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to celebrate Canada’s innovators and entrepreneurs. Their hard work and bold ideas have driven prosperity throughout our country’s history, and have helped to grow the strong middle class at the heart of Canada’s success. Today, we thank them for helping to build a stronger economy and a better country. I also thank Futurpreneur Canada, the official host of Global Entrepreneurship Week in Canada. Futurpreneur Canada has helped nearly 10,000 young people launch and grow businesses of every kind in every part of Canada, creating roughly 40,000 Canadian jobs over the years. I wish them every success with this year’s activities.

Today, we commemorate the life of Louis Riel, a fearless Métis leader, politician, and founder of the province of Manitoba.
Louis Riel was a courageous and impassioned defender of minority rights and a key contributor to Canadian Confederation. Today, we celebrate a man who envisioned – and fought for – a more diverse and more inclusive country.
Last year, I promised that federal ministers and Métis Nation leaders would work together to advance meaningful reconciliation and solve important challenges. Earlier this year, we took a significant step toward a renewed government-to-government relationship with the signing of the Canada-Métis Nation Accord. This accord is a solid foundation on which to build a new partnership – one based on recognition of rights, respect, and co-operation.
As we continue our journey of reconciliation, I encourage everyone today to honour the Métis people and recognize their many contributions to Canada.

It was with sadness that I learned today of the death of Senator Tobias C. Enverga Jr., the first Filipino-Canadian appointed to the Senate.
Senator Enverga served Canadians long before his appointment to the Senate in 2012, and was the first Filipino-Canadian elected to public office in the City of Toronto. He was a tireless advocate for the Filipino community and people with disabilities, and founder of the Philippine Canadian Charitable Foundation.
As a Senator, he continued to actively promote the values of multiculturalism, diversity, and inclusiveness. He was well respected by colleagues in both Houses of Parliament.
For his efforts, Senator Enverga was awarded the Diamond Jubilee Medal in 2012, and recognized by the President of the Philippines with the ‘Lingkod sa Kapwa Pilipino’ presidential award in 2008.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I offer our sincerest condolences to Senator Enverga’s wife Rosemer; to their three daughters, Rystle, Reeza and Rocel; and to Senator Enverga’s friends and colleagues.


On National Child Day, we celebrate our children and young people, and make sure they have every opportunity to succeed and reach their full potential. It is up to all of us to ensure children’s rights are protected, that they are protected from harm, and have a voice in issues that matter to them.
The toughest issues of our time – fighting climate change, making gender equality a reality, building a fairer, more inclusive world – have no easy solutions. These challenges demand a global response, shaped across borders, involving every generation. Ultimately, success depends on our youngest leaders and their ability to lead – which starts with a safe and happy childhood.
The Government of Canada is committed to making sure our children have the best possible start in life. Through the Canada Child Benefit (CCB), we have put more money in the pockets of Canadian families to help them with the high costs of raising their children. The CCB has helped lift 300,000 children out of poverty. We will strengthen the CCB by increasing the benefits annually to keep pace with the rising cost of living, starting July 2018.
Last March, we committed $7.5 billion over 11 years to support early learning and child care and make high-quality, affordable child care available to more Canadian families. As part of this investment, we will establish, in cooperation with Indigenous communities, a distinct Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Framework that reflects the unique cultures and needs of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis children.
We remain committed to providing services to Indigenous children and families that better meet their needs. To that end, we have established a new department focused on Indigenous services. We will work together with Indigenous partners to transform services so that they are truly child-centred, community-directed, and focused on prevention, family preservation, and well-being.
Our children deserve the very best. We will continue to help build a better quality of life for future generations through investments that give young people better access to mental health services and help them afford post-secondary education and prepare for the jobs of today and tomorrow.
Today, organizations all over Canada will host special events to commemorate National Child Day. In Ottawa, more than 30 children and young people from across the country will gather for a National Summit to begin creating a Canadian Children’s Charter – a plan of action to respect, protect, and fulfil the rights of our children.
Sophie and I invite all Canadians to join us in celebrating National Child Day. Together, we must make sure children everywhere get the love, safety, and support they need to live a full childhood and pursue their dreams.

On behalf of all Canadians, I offer my sincere congratulations to Paul Quassa on being chosen by the Nunavut Legislative Assembly to lead the territorial government.
I look forward to working with Premier Quassa and the new government. By coming together in a spirit of cooperation, I know we can deliver true, meaningful reconciliation between Canada and Indigenous Peoples, and bring about a better quality of life for Indigenous Peoples in Nunavut.
The Government of Canada will continue to work with Indigenous, territorial, and provincial partners to co-develop a new Arctic Policy Framework that better reflects the needs and priorities of the North, and builds stronger, more sustainable communities in the region.
I extend my sincere thanks to Peter Taptuna for his contributions to Nunavut and to Canada during his time as Premier. I wish him all the best in his future endeavours.


I am shocked and horrified by today’s terrorist attack in the al-Rawda mosque in Bir-Al-Abed, which killed and injured hundreds of worshippers.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the friends and families of the victims of today’s attack. We hope for a complete and rapid recovery for all those injured.
This senseless attack targeted people praying at their place of worship – a place where they should have felt safe and secure.
Canada condemns this attack and stands shoulder-to-shoulder with the people of Egypt in this difficult time. We offer our full support to the Government of Egypt, and we will continue to work closely with our allies and the international community to counter violent extremism that leads to such appalling acts.
We must stand against these acts of terrorism and counter hate by promoting the values of diversity, inclusion, and peace.


Today, we commemorate one of the darkest chapters in human history: the Ukrainian Holodomor of 1932-33. This systemic and horrific genocide, undertaken by a totalitarian Soviet regime, killed millions of Ukrainian men, women, and children by starvation. It was a failed attempt to destroy the identity and will of the Ukrainian people.
We stand with the victims of the Holodomor and their descendants to remember and condemn this unconscionable act. Remembering history is our best hope against repeating it.
To honour the millions of people who suffered under communist regimes, the Government of Canada – in partnership with Tribute to Liberty – is building a Memorial to the Victims of Communism. This memorial recognizes Canada as a place of refuge and highlights our history of welcoming people fleeing injustice and persecution.
On this sombre anniversary, I invite all Canadians to take time today to remember the victims of the Holodomor, and to reflect on the remarkable contributions citizens of Ukrainian descent have made to our country.
Today, we also reaffirm Canada’s unwavering support for the people of Ukraine, its sovereignty and territorial integrity, and reforms being undertaken by Ukraine’s government to bring greater security and prosperity to its people.


Violence against women is a violation of human rights – and an issue that affects all of us. We are all harmed when people in our communities and society experience violence – and all of us share a responsibility to make sure women and girls have the respect, protection, and freedom that is their right.
Men must hold themselves and each other accountable and be part of the solution. From speaking up about the rights of women and girls, to promoting women’s leadership in every aspect of our society, to standing against violence whenever it occurs, men have a vital role to play in eliminating gender-based violence.
Ending gender-based violence means transforming a culture that devalues women and dismisses their voices. Together, we must challenge the prejudices and inequalities that allow this violence to persist. We know gender-based violence differently and disproportionately affects those most vulnerable – including trans women, Indigenous women, women of colour, low-income women, refugees and displaced women, and others. To change this reality, we must actively seek out and listen to the voices and needs of women, especially those cast furthest to the margins.
That is why the Government of Canada has adopted It’s Time: Canada’s Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence based on prevention, support for survivors and their families, and the promotion of responsive legal and justice systems. It is also why the Government remains determined to seek justice for missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls and to prevent these tragedies from continuing to occur.
Together with people across Canada and around the world, the Government is working tirelessly to eliminate violence against women and girls – but so much remains to be done.
Today and throughout the 16 Days of Activism Against Gender-Based Violence, I encourage all Canadians to join the #MYActionsMatter campaign and find your way to combat violence against women.We are interdependent and interconnected, and we are stronger when everyone’s rights are protected. Working together – as communities, businesses, governments, and individuals – I know we can build a world free from violence for women and girls everywhere.


Canada condemns the migrant slave trade taking place in Libya. The targeting of desperate migrants from Africa – vulnerable children, women, and men struggling to find a home and a place of rest – is abhorrent and despicable.
Canada will not stay silent in the face of such inhumane atrocities. While it is clear that the Libyan Government is investigating this horrific injustice, and humanitarian organizations have launched efforts to help the victims, more must be done to address the situation.
We again call on all United Nations member states to implement and respect the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking, Especially Women and Children. We must work together to recognize and protect the human rights and dignity of all people.
The international community must take action to end the exploitation and trafficking of innocent people. Canada will continue its work to eradicate human trafficking and support all international efforts to bring those who prey on vulnerable people to justice.

On behalf of all Canadians, I congratulate the Toronto Argonauts on winning the 105th Grey Cup over the Calgary Stampeders in Ottawa, Ontario.
What better way to celebrate Canada 150 than coming together on a crisp and snowy night in the nation's capital to watch the Grey Cup.
The Grey Cup is one of Canada’s favourite traditions, and the pinnacle of Canadian football. It has been part of Canadian sports since 1909, when Governor General Earl Grey donated the first Grey Cup to the Canadian Football League.
I congratulate the City of Ottawa and the RNation for hosting the 105th Grey Cup. I also thank both teams and the Canadian Football League for another memorable year and all they do to unite Canadians around sports.


On World AIDS Day, we join people in Canada and around the world to show solidarity with people living with HIV, to remember those lost because of the virus, and to unite to end HIV/AIDS for good.
Today is a chance to reflect on our global efforts to fight HIV/AIDS, and to celebrate the great strides we have made in prevention, testing, and treatment. It is also a time to honour the people who, over decades and all around the world, fought for the rights of people living with HIV/AIDS and pushed for education, compassion, and care. Now, we must continue to build on their work and end stigma, isolation, and HIV transmission – so that no one has to lose a loved one to this preventable, treatable condition.
The first week of December is also Aboriginal AIDS Awareness Week. In Canada, Indigenous Peoples continue to be over-represented in the HIV epidemic, making up more than 10 per cent of all new infections. The Government of Canada is committed to working with Indigenous partners and communities to build supportive environments and culturally appropriate approaches to meeting the needs of Indigenous Peoples in addressing HIV/AIDS.
We know that HIV disproportionately affects the world’s poorest and most vulnerable – especially women and girls. Advancing gender equality must be part of the solution. We pledged $804 million during the Fifth Replenishment Conference of the Global Fund to fight AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria. The Conference raised over $12.9 billion in pledges, which will be instrumental in ending this devastating epidemic by 2030. Together, we can make sure people living with HIV/AIDS have access to the treatment, care, and support they need.
Together, let’s end it. Let’s unite to end stigma and discrimination, end isolation, and end HIV transmission. Today and every day, let’s stand with people living with HIV – and meet this global challenge together.


The International Day of Persons with Disabilities is a time to celebrate the contributions that people with disabilities make to our country and our world. It is also an opportunity to learn about what we can do so that everyone is able to fully participate in our communities and workplaces without barriers.
This year’s theme – Transformation towards sustainable and resilient society for all – reminds us that resilient societies are inclusive societies. We must acknowledge the leadership of people with disabilities, and work with them to address the challenges they face and to achieve the goals laid out in the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
While our country has made important progress toward advancing the rights of people with disabilities, Canada must continue to show leadership and actively promote diversity, equality, and inclusion – here at home and abroad. That is why we are investing in programs like the 2017 Enabling Accessibility Fund, which will help enhance and ensure greater accessibility and opportunities for people with disabilities in our communities, schools, workplaces, sport facilities, and beyond.
Our Government is committed to helping Canadians with disabilities or functional limitations fully participate in their workplaces and communities. From July 2016 to February 2017, we consulted with people across the country on planned accessibility legislation. We will use this feedback as we move toward tabling this legislation in early 2018.
This year, the 150th anniversary of Confederation reminded us that our diversity that is our greatest strength. All of us benefit when everyone’s rights are protected – and each one of us has a role to play to make inclusion a reality.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite all Canadians to join me in celebrating International Day of Persons with Disabilities. Not just today, but throughout the year, I urge you to take action and help create a truly accessible, just, and inclusive world for all.

Today, we mark the 100th anniversary of the Halifax Explosion.
On the morning of December 6, 1917, in the midst of the First World War, the munitions ship SS Mont-Blanc and the freighter SS Imo collided in the narrows of Halifax Harbour. The SS Mont-Blanc caught fire and erupted in an explosion that levelled the north end of Halifax – changing the city forever.
It was the largest human-made explosion before the atomic bomb, and remains one of the deadliest disasters in Canadian history. Nearly 2,000 people were killed in the blast, including hundreds of children. Thousands more were gravely injured. Half the city’s population was left without shelter in the immediate aftermath.
The tragedy devastated Halifax, but Nova Scotians, like Vincent Coleman, responded with resilience and courage. A railway dispatcher, Coleman gave his life to warn incoming trains of the danger. Soldiers, sailors, police, firefighters, and hundreds of civilians rushed to the disaster zone to help the injured and rescue those trapped under debris. Communities across the province and country offered support, and help poured in from friends beyond our borders – from Massachusetts to Australia. Together, Nova Scotians recovered, rebuilt, and emerged stronger than before.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I invite Canadians to honour the memory of the victims of this terrible tragedy and those who came to Halifax’s aid. As the 150th anniversary of Confederation draws to a close, let us reflect on this powerful example of Canadians overcoming hardship and tragedy with perseverance and compassion.


Twenty-eight years ago, at l'École Polytechnique de Montréal, 14 young women were viciously murdered in a senseless and hateful act of violence. On the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women, we mourn with their families and friends, and pay tribute to the women whose future was robbed from them.
The tragedy at l’École Polytechnique was a devastating reminder of what can happen when hatred and misogyny prevail. Yet almost thirty years on, gender-based violence continues to affect the daily lives of women and girls everywhere – in Canada and around the world.
This is unacceptable. We must find the courage to stand up and speak out against gender-based violence in all its forms. That means valuing the voices of women and girls, fighting the injustices and inequalities that put the most vulnerable women at the greatest risk of violence, and breaking down a culture that dismisses women’s worth – from Hollywood studios to the halls of Parliament. Every single one of us, no matter our gender identity, can and must be part of the solution to stop violence before it starts.
The Government of Canada is taking action through our Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence. This strategy – which includes nearly $100 million in funding over five years and $20 million per year on an ongoing basis – focuses on prevention, support for survivors and their families, and responsive legal and justice systems. We are also investing in the construction and renovation of shelters and transition houses for victims of family violence. Our work to promote women’s leadership in government and business, and to prioritize gender equality in our decision-making at home and abroad, is part of a cultural shift towards valuing women’s voices.
As we mourn with the loved ones of the women so senselessly lost, I invite all Canadians to reflect on how each of us can help eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls. Our actions matter. Each of us has the power to make our world more just and more gender-equal. Today, let us move forward together to build a future where everyone’s rights are protected, and everyone’s voices are heard.


Today, Orthodox Christians around the world will gather with family, friends, and loved ones to celebrate Christmas.
This joyful time of year is an opportunity to appreciate the many blessings we enjoy here in Canada. We are fortunate to live in a country where cultural and religious diversity are considered tremendous strengths, not weaknesses. I invite all Canadians to take this time to reflect on the values we cherish most, and to lend a helping hand to those in need.
In the weeks and months ahead, Canada will continue to receive thousands of Syrian refugees. I am certain that these new arrivals will be granted a warm and compassionate welcome from Canadians across our great country, in keeping with our values of kindness and generosity.
On behalf of Sophie and our three children, I wish you and your family a blessed Christmas. May the new year be filled with peace, health, and happiness for all.

Today, Tamils both in Canada and around the world come together with friends and family to celebrate Thai Pongal, the four-day Tamil harvest festival.
As the harvest season comes to an end, each day of this festival has its own special meaning and traditions which are tied to abundance, peace and happiness.
Thai Pongal reminds us of the many cultures and traditions that we are privileged to enjoy here in Canada. Our rich diversity is a source of strength, which should be cherished and celebrated.
This is also a time for all Canadians to recognize the important contributions the Tamil community has made and continues to make across our country.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating Thai Pongal a joyful harvest festival.


Canada strongly condemns the deadly terrorist attacks that took place in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
On behalf of all Canadians, we offer our deepest condolences to the families, friends and colleagues of all those killed and a speedy recovery to all those injured. We are deeply saddened by these senseless acts of violence on innocent civilians.
We have offered assistance to the Burkinabé authorities in their investigation of this terrible crime.

Today we pay tribute to Raoul Wallenberg, a remarkable hero whose courage and compassion rescued thousands of Hungarian Jews from persecution at the hands of fascist regimes during the Second World War.
As a Swedish diplomat, Mr. Wallenberg provided many Jewish people living in Budapest with special ‘protective passports’ that saved them from deportation to concentration camps. He also created a network of safe havens, which operated under the Swedish flag. These safe houses, hospitals, and child care centres rescued many more lives and offered desperately-needed refuge to those fleeing persecution.
Tragically, Raoul Wallenberg was captured by Soviet forces in the final stages of the war. His fate remains unknown, but his heroic achievements have since been celebrated internationally. Many awards, monuments, institutions, forests, and anti-racism campaigns have been named after him. In Canada, he was granted honourary citizenship in 1985, and a stamp was issued in his honour in 2013.
On Raoul Wallenberg Day, I encourage all Canadians to join me in remembrance of Mr. Wallenberg’s courageous achievements and his great humanitarian legacy.
I learned with deep sadness and shock today about the shooting at a high school and another location in Saskatchewan that involved multiple deaths and injuries.
I was immediately in touch with the Minister of Public Safety, the Hon. Ralph Goodale, and the Commissioner of the RCMP, Bob Paulson, and am receiving regular updates on the situation.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer the families and friends of the victims our deepest condolences on this darkest of days. Our hearts and prayers are also with those injured in the attack, that they may have a full and speedy recovery.
I wish to thank first responders—law enforcement and medical personnel— who managed this very difficult situation with bravery and professionalism.
On this sad day the whole country grieves with the people of La Loche and of Saskatchewan.
Today, I had the honour of meeting with Inuit leaders from across the North to discuss the unique challenges their communities face and the exciting opportunities the region holds.
This afternoon’s discussion with members of the Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami was an important step in renewing the relationship between Canada and the Inuit – one based on respect, rights, cooperation, and partnership.
A key part of our meeting focused on how we can better work together with Inuit leaders, the territories and provinces, along with other parties, to address issues important to the Inuit, including the social and economic obstacles that directly affect Inuit success.
I want to thank leaders of the Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami for meeting with me today and giving me the opportunity to begin to earn their trust. I am eager to bring about positive change in the lives of Inuit across Canada and work together to unleash the North’s amazing potential.

On this day, we pay tribute to the memory of the millions of victims murdered during the Holocaust. We honour those who survived atrocities at the hands of the Nazi regime, and welcome their courageous stories of hope and perseverance.
The Holocaust is a stark reminder of the dangers and risks of allowing hate, prejudice, and discrimination to spread unchallenged. It also reminds us that silence must never be an option when humanity is threatened.
As we pause to educate ourselves and our families on the bitter lessons of the Holocaust, we also strengthen our resolve to work with domestic and international partners to continue defending human rights and condemning intolerance.

Today, we celebrate a very special anniversary in our country’s history: exactly 100 years ago, women in Manitoba became the first women in Canada to gain the right to vote.
This victory played a crucial role in shaping the Canada we know and love – a Canada where acceptance, equality, and respect are integral parts of who we are and what we stand for. While we have made progress towards gender equality, we still have a lot of hard work to do. We know that far too many women in Canada – and around the world – continue to face discrimination.
These brave suffragettes led by example then, and they continue to inspire us now – all Canadians, women and men alike, should be proud to call themselves feminists. We remain committed to advancing gender equality so that our society is one where all women and girls can reach their full potential.
Together, we can, and will, continue to push for true equality between men and women, right here in Canada and around the world.

Today, I will visit La Loche, Saskatchewan, to personally express the country’s shock and sadness over last week’s tragic shootings.
It is both heartbreaking and devastating when lives so full of promise are taken from us too soon. On January 22nd, four Canadians were senselessly killed. Seven more were injured, and the lives of countless others were altered by these terrible events.
I would like to extend my most heartfelt sympathies to the families of the victims, and I would like to wish a rapid recovery to all those injured. Together, as a country, we join in mourning with the people of La Loche.
I look forward to personally thanking the first responders – the RCMP and medical personnel – for their courage and professionalism. I have also been deeply moved by the courage of the families and friends of the victims, the mental health workers, the school’s personnel and students, the mayor, and Indigenous leaders.

February is Black History Month, a time to acknowledge and celebrate the many achievements and contributions that Canadians of African and Caribbean heritage have made to our great country. 
This year, we mark the 20th anniversary of Black History Month in Canada. Throughout our history, Black Canadians have played a key role in building and shaping the diverse, free, and prosperous country that we enjoy today.  
The Government of Canada’s theme for this year’s Black History Month is A Story of Courage – The Road to Canada 150. As Canada prepares to celebrate the 150th anniversary of Confederation in 2017, we invite everyone to celebrate the bravery and strength that Black Canadians have shown over the course of our history.
Black History Month also reminds us that our nation’s greatest strength is its diversity. I encourage all Canadians to take part in the events and activities that take place in their communities – to honour the legacy of Black Canadians and our country’s heritage.

As Canadians, we are defined by our compassion, our generosity, and our ingenuity. Nowhere are these qualities more evident than in our international development workers and volunteers. These Canadians work tirelessly at home – and around the world – to reduce poverty and inequality.
Moving forward, the Government of Canada will be refocusing development assistance on helping the world’s poorest and most vulnerable. Our efforts will be guided by the principles of innovation and effectiveness, as we strive to make Canada’s approach to development something that we can all be proud of.
During International Development Week, I encourage all Canadians to learn – and draw inspiration from – those who do so much to make our world a safer and more compassionate place to live.

Vietnamese communities in Canada and around the world will come together this week to celebrate T?t Nguyên Ðán, known as the Lunar New Year. This year marks the arrival of the year of the Monkey.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Canadians of Vietnamese origin for the important contributions they make to our country every day. Your vibrant community is an example of Canadian diversity, one of our country’s greatest strengths.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating T?t a year filled with prosperity, health, and joy.
Chúc m?ng nam m?i.

Today, Canadians of Korean descent will celebrate Seollal and welcome the year of the Monkey.
Seollal is a time to reflect on the year that has passed, recognize good fortune, and look optimistically to the year ahead. Korean Canadians – and around the world – will pay their respects to their elders and ancestors, visit with family and friends, and enjoy traditional feasts.
As we mark the New Year, let us also reflect on the immense contributions of Canadians of Korean descent that have helped make Canada the strong and diverse country that it is today.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating the New Year health, prosperity, peace, and happiness.
?? ? ?? ????

This week, Canadians of Chinese descent will celebrate the New Year— and welcome the arrival of the year of the Fire Monkey, an animal that symbolizes cleverness, wittiness, intelligence, and curiosity.
As friends and families come together in shared hope for a prosperous year to come, we take this moment to recognize the valuable contributions Canadians of Chinese origin have made to our country. We know that Canada is a strong and resilient nation because of its diversity.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those marking this occasion a very happy New Year.
Gong Xi Fa Cai! Gong Hey Fat Choy! Gong Xi! Gong Xi!

When we were elected, we promised real change to improve the lives of Canadians – change based on what people from coast to coast to coast have told us they want. After the first 100 days, I am proud of the progress we have made towards that goal.
As one of our first orders of business, we cut taxes for the middle class. We asked the wealthiest Canadians to pay a little more, so that more money could be put back into the pockets of middle class Canadians.
In November, I was extremely proud to introduce our gender-balanced Cabinet. We know our country is enriched – and our government is more effective – when decision-makers represent Canada’s rich diversity.
Our government also began the important consultations to design a framework for an inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls. Indigenous communities demand answers and they deserve justice.
Together, we have demonstrated global leadership by welcoming thousands of Syrian refugees into our homes and our communities. These new Canadians will make great contributions to our country, and the extent to which Canadians have come together to lend a hand is nothing short of inspirational.
We have also made important investments in innovative industries like regenerative medicine and clean water technologies. We restored the long-form census, introduced legislation to bring fairness to Canadian labour laws, and have announced that we will re-open the Kitsilano Coast Guard base. These are just a handful of our achievements after just 100 days in government.
Today, I am happy to announce that our government will create an additional 35,000 summer jobs for students this year. Through the Canada Summer Jobs program, we will invest up to an extra $113 million to help young Canadians get the valuable work experience they need.
Youth unemployment has remained stubbornly high, and far too many young people have not been able to join the workforce. Our government was elected on a promise to do something about this, right away, and that is exactly what we are doing.
While I am excited about what we have accomplished in the first 100 days, I know there is still much to do to help Canadian families. In the upcoming budget, we will continue with our plan to invest in strengthening the middle class with a new Canada Child Benefit and historic investments in job-creating infrastructure.
Today, I join Canadians at home and abroad in celebrating the 51st anniversary of our national flag.
The Maple Leaf is a powerful symbol that unites Canadians across the country and around the world. It has been worn by our astronauts in space, by the brave women and men of the Canadian Armed Forces, and thousands of backpackers around the globe. Our flag has been planted on Mount Everest, raised over Olympic podiums, and proudly flown at our embassies.
No matter where the Maple Leaf flies, our flag represents the values that our country holds most dear: peace, freedom, respect, compassion, and diversity. As Canada moves towards a greater leadership role in the world, I am confident that our flag will remain synonymous with these cherished Canadian values.
On this important day, I invite all Canadians to take part in Canadian Heritage’s ‘Share your Moment with the Flag’ Challenge, to celebrate our national flag and what it stands for.

Today, I join the Métis people, Manitobans, and Canadians across the country to commemorate Louis Riel: a champion of minority rights, a Founder of Manitoba, and a key contributor to Canadian Confederation.
Louis Riel made important sacrifices to defend the rights, the freedoms, and the culture of the Métis people. The ideals that Louis Riel fought for – ideals of inclusiveness and equality – are now the very same values on which we base our country’s identity.
As we work to renew a nation-to-nation relationship with the Indigenous peoples of Canada, including the Métis people, let us take a moment to reflect on the life of Louis Riel, and celebrate the many contributions of Métis communities to our great country.

Today, we mourn the loss of Boutros Boutros-Ghali, former Secretary-General of the United Nations and of La Francophonie.
Mr. Boutros-Ghali led the United Nations during a tumultuous period in history as the world grappled with major crises in Rwanda, Somalia, and former Yugoslavia. He was a champion for world peace, and charted a path for the United Nations focused on conflict prevention, peacemaking, and peacekeeping. As the first Secretary-General of La Francophonie, he promoted the French language and culture in the world.
Mr. Boutros-Ghali’s legacy includes the major role he had in the successful negotiation of the1979 Treaty of Peace between Egypt and Israel, as well as his ground-breaking report ‘An Agenda for Peace’.
On behalf of all Canadians, we extend our deepest condolences to Mr. Boutros-Ghali’s family, friends, and colleagues.

I learned with sadness today of the passing of former Alberta Premier Don Getty. On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to his family, friends, colleagues, and to the people of the province.
Mr. Getty was a gifted politician, athlete, and businessman. He guided Alberta through challenging economic times, was a strong proponent of Senate reform, and worked in close collaboration with Indigenous peoples across the province.
Over his long career of public service, Mr. Getty received many honours, including being made an Officer of the Order of Canada and a member of the Alberta Order of Excellence.
Mr. Getty was a tireless champion of strengthening Alberta’s presence in Canada.  His immense contributions to both the province and the country will be honoured and remembered.

Canada's First Ministers today issued a joint communiqué following the First Ministers' Meeting and released a declaration on clean growth and climate change:
In the spirit of cooperation and collaboration, we met today to discuss the economy and actions to address climate change and agreed on immediate work to support growth and create new jobs.
Building on commitments and actions already taken by provinces and territories and the momentum from COP21 in Paris, we are moving toward a pan-Canadian framework for clean growth and climate change that will meet or exceed Canada's international emissions targets, and will transition our country to a stronger, more resilient, low-carbon economy – while also improving our quality of life.
We know that a fair transition to a sustainable, low-carbon economy is necessary for our collective prosperity, competitiveness, health, and security. Taking smart and effective action today is essential for future generations. These decisions will put Canada at the forefront of the global clean growth economy, and will create opportunities to diversify our economies, open up access to new markets, reduce emissions, and generate good paying, long-term jobs for Canadians.
To achieve our goals, we will build on the leadership shown and actions taken by the provinces and territories, as exemplified by the 2015 Quebec Declaration.
For its part, the Government of Canada committed to the following:
support climate change mitigation and adaptation through investments in green infrastructure, public transit infrastructure and energy efficient social infrastructure;
work together with the provinces and territories on how best to lever federal investments in the Low Carbon Economy Fund to realize incremental emission reductions;
advance the electrification of vehicle transportation, in collaboration with provinces and territories;
foster dialogue and the development of regional plans for clean electricity transmission to reduce emissions;
advance efforts to eliminate the dependence on diesel in Indigenous, remote, and Northern communities – and use renewable, clean energy as a replacement; and
as part of Canada's participation in Mission Innovation, double investments in clean energy, research and development over five years, and work with global partners to promote cleaner energy and better environmental outcomes.
We will identify measures that governments can take to grow their economies and reduce emissions in the long term.
To this end, we directed immediate work in four areas: clean technology, innovation, and jobs; carbon pricing mechanisms adapted to each province's and territory's specific circumstances and in particular the realities of Canada's Indigenous peoples and Arctic and sub-Arctic regions; specific mitigation opportunities; and, adaptation and climate resilience. Four working groups will be established to report on these priorities. Their reports including options will be submitted to the ministerial tables charged with overseeing their work and will be made public. Ministers will review those reports and provide their recommendations to First Ministers by October 2016. Those recommendations and the reports of the working groups will be used to develop the pan-Canadian framework for clean growth and climate change, a concrete plan that will also allow us to meet our international commitments.
In addition, federal, provincial and territorial energy ministers will collaborate on work underway on energy efficiency and clean energy technology and innovation through the Council of the Federation's Canadian Energy Strategy, in order to contribute to the pan-Canadian framework on clean growth and climate change.
We took stock of the economy and discussed real challenges facing Canadians as well as longer-term opportunities. We have a shared objective to promote jobs and growth, address urgent economic needs, and support long-term growth in transitioning to a low-carbon economy.
We recognize that making strategic investments in our economy to spur economic growth in the short term will benefit our economy and protect the environment. That is why the federal government committed to fast-track existing infrastructure allocations in all provinces and territories, in addition to making significant new investments in infrastructure.
We recognize the critical importance of fostering innovation, attracting investment, encouraging trade, and developing the skills of our workforce to create good jobs and grow the economy. We have directed ministers to work together to advance these shared priorities.
We also agreed to pursue necessary reforms to the Agreement on Internal Trade to benefit Canadians, as well as help Canadian businesses to grow their exports and be more competitive on the world stage.
We agreed on the importance and urgency of moving Canada's resources to market in responsible, timely, predictable and sustainable ways that Canadians trust, based on robust science-based environmental assessments conducted within existing jurisdictional frameworks and that contribute to long-term economic growth and job creation.
In the Vancouver Declaration on Clean Growth and Climate Change, we have outlined the vision and principles that will guide our governments as we move towards sustainable and clean economic growth. Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will work together to make this vision a reality. We will work collaboratively with Indigenous peoples across the country to ensure a more sustainable and prosperous future for Canada. We also recognize that businesses, civil society, and individual Canadians should be mobilized to achieve these goals.
Building on our progress today, we are confident that we will tackle the short-term economic challenges and set the country on a path towards long-term clean growth, emissions reductions, and a more prosperous, green, and healthy future for all Canadians.

On this special day, we celebrate the many achievements of women in Canada – and around the world – and we reaffirm our commitment to gender equality.
While we have made enormous progress towards equality over the years, we know that we still have a lot of hard work to do. Far too many women and girls continue to face injustices and discrimination.
It is unacceptable that in 2016, women are still denied an education, forced into an early marriage, or made victims of gender-based violence. As leaders, as parents, as community members, upholding women’s rights should be – and must be – a priority for us all.
Canada’s theme for this year‘s International Women’s Day – Women’s Empowerment Leads to Equality – reminds us that we all benefit when women and girls have the opportunities and the resources they need to succeed.
We remain committed to advancing gender equality, so that Canada can become a country where all women and girls can reach their full potential.
Today, I encourage all Canadians to join me in celebrating International Women’s Day. I also urge you to take part in the Government of Canada #YouAreEmpowerment campaign to honour a woman who has inspired you. 

Today, President Obama and I had a very productive meeting that will help our countries transition to low-carbon economies, foster clean growth, and create good jobs and great opportunities for our citizens.
The President and I agreed to formally join the Paris Agreement in the global fight against climate change, and to take ambitious actions to reduce methane, hydroflurocarbon, and greenhouse gas emissions.
We announced a new partnership to build a sustainable Arctic economy, and we will work together to develop new, science-based standards for commercial fishing, low-impact shipping, sustainable development, and Arctic biodiversity.
We also committed to make our borders more open and more secure, and we agreed in principle to expand preclearance to Billy Bishop Airport in Toronto, Jean Lesage International Airport in Quebec City, as well as rail service in Montreal and Vancouver.
The President and I reaffirmed our commitment to streamline trade between our countries. Each day, $2.4 billion worth of goods and services cross the border. We agreed to work in collaboration to bring trade and investment to new heights.
Finally, we agreed that Canada will host the North American Leaders Summit in the Summer of 2016. President Obama will address Parliament during his visit to Canada for the summit.
Canada and the United States share the same values, the same origins, and the same space. We face many of the same challenges, and we are all better off when we tackle them together.  

On Commonwealth Day, we come together to recognize the common ties and shared values that unite the citizens of the 53 member countries.
Our Commonwealth family spans Africa, Asia, the Americas, Europe, and the Pacific; it includes more than two billion people, and many different backgrounds, cultures, and languages.
Canada remains committed to protect and promote the key principles of the Commonwealth: democracy, inclusivity, and accountable governance. Moving forward, we will continue to promote human rights, advance the rights of women, and address discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity.
Our shared history and values – outlined in the Commonwealth Charter – provide the foundation for our nations to tackle the challenges ahead. In collaboration with our Commonwealth partners, we can ensure a brighter, better world for all generations to come.

Today, we welcome the New Year as marked in the Persian Calendar and celebrate Nowruz.
For thousands of years, Nowruz has been celebrated by Persian, Central Asian, Kurdish and Ismaili communities. Marking the beginning of spring, it is an occasion for friends and family to come together over the haft seen table, exchange gifts, and enjoy traditional delicacies. It is also a time to reflect on the values of peace, harmony, tolerance, and reconciliation. 
Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and a source of pride. As Nowruz brings together people of many different cultures, religions, and languages, let us take this time to recognize and celebrate the contributions of Persian, Central Asian, Kurdish and Ismaili Canadians across the country.
On behalf of Sophie and my family, I wish a healthy, happy, and prosperous new year to all those marking Nowruz in Canada and across the world.
Har Ruz etan Nowrouz, Nowruz etan Pyrouz.

Today, we join Francophones around the world to celebrate the richness and diversity of the French language and culture.  
For centuries, Francophone communities have added to the strength and prosperity of our country, and continue to contribute to our rich cultural and linguistic diversity.
Canada’s long traditions of democracy, freedom, and inclusivity are rooted and reflected in our two official languages. Official bilingualism is fundamental to our Canadian identity, and has helped us to become a society in which people from diverse cultures, origins, and religions can feel at home.
On this International Day of La Francophonie, we celebrate our Francophone culture and heritage, as well as our deep ties to the global Francophone community. Together, we will continue to build a better world based on the shared values of cooperation, solidarity, and diversity.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I extend my best wishes to everyone celebrating the International Day of La Francophonie, both here at home, and around the world.

Today, I join Canadians – and people around the world – to recognize the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
As we approach Canada’s 150th birthday, we can look over our past and see how each successive generation of Canadians has fought to expand liberty to their fellow citizens who had been denied it.
We have had deeply regrettable moments. But the history of Canada is one in which we constantly challenge ourselves, and each other, one in which we fight racism and discrimination in order to protect equality and justice.
We still have a lot of work to do. Far too many people around the world continue to be denied their most basic human rights simply because of the colour of their skin, their faith, or their ethnic background. 
On this day, I urge all Canadians to stand against racism and all forms of discrimination whenever and wherever they occur. Diversity is at the very heart of Canada. It is who we are and what we believe in.

I am outraged and deeply saddened by the news that so many have been killed and injured in terrorist attacks targeting the people of Brussels, Belgium.
Sophie and I join all Canadians in extending our deepest condolences to the families and friends of those killed. We also hope for a fast recovery to all those who have been injured.
Canada stands by Belgium in this difficult time and has offered all possible assistance. We will continue to work closely with our allies and the international community to help fight and prevent terrorism here and abroad, and to bring to justice those who are responsible for planning and carrying out these senseless acts.
Canadians mourn the loss of so many innocent victims. Our thoughts and prayers are with the people of Belgium.
Canadian citizens in Brussels requiring emergency consular assistance should contact the Embassy of Canada in Brussels at 32 (2) 741-0611 or call Global Affairs Canada’s 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre collect at +1 613 996 8885 or at +1 800 387 3124. An email can also be sent to sos@international.gc.ca.
Friends and relatives in Canada of Canadian citizens known to be in the area can contact Global Affairs Canada’s 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre by calling 613-996-8885 or 1-800-387-3124, or by sending an email to sos@international.gc.ca.

This week, Canadians of Hindu faith will join their communities and loved ones in celebration of the fun-filled festival of colours.
Holi marks the end of winter and the beginning of spring. To usher in the new season, families will sing and dance, eat delicacies, light bonfires, and paint each other with brightly coloured powders and dyes.
This happy holiday is an opportunity to renew friendships and celebrate peace, but it is also a time to reflect on traditional notions of good and evil, and the ultimate triumph of light over darkness. It is a festival that is celebrated by Hindus and non-Hindus alike across Canada, South Asia, and around the world.
As friends and families come together for this joyous occasion, we must take a moment to recognize the tremendous contributions Canadians of Hindu faith have made to our country. Our diversity is our greatest strength.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those marking this occasion a fun, happy and colourful Holi.
Holi Hai!

Today at sunset, Jewish people in Canada and around the world will join their loved ones to celebrate Purim.
On this joyous occasion, friends and families will come together to wear costumes, play games, feast on Hamantaschen, and exchange gifts.
Traditionally, Purim recounts the story of Queen Esther and her uncle Mordecai, who saved the Jewish people of ancient Persia. On this occasion, we are reminded of the strength of the Jewish people, who have survived and triumphed over unspeakable persecution.
As we read the Megillah Esther, we reaffirm our ongoing responsibility to take action and stand against acts of anti-Semitism, and other expressions of hatred and discrimination, both here in Canada and around the world.
On behalf of Canadians and our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a joyous Purim.
Chag Purim Sameach!

It was with great sorrow that I learned today of the death of Jim Hillyer, the Member of Parliament for Medicine Hat-Cardston-Warner.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I would like to express our deepest condolences to his wife Livi, their four children, and his friends and colleagues.
The parliamentary community is a tight-knit one, and I want to say how much of a privilege it has been to serve with Jim. I know he will be greatly missed on the Hill and in his constituency.
Our thoughts and prayers are with his loved ones as they grieve this very sudden loss. We will provide any support they need during this incredibly difficult time.

This weekend, millions of Canadians and people around the world will join with friends and family to celebrate the Easter holiday.
Easter is the holiest of Christian holidays, and marks the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ.
It is a sacred time for many, and an opportunity for us all to extend a helping hand to those in need, and to reflect on the notions of personal sacrifice and compassion that underlie the occasion.
As we gather with those most important to us, let us put into practice what it truly means to love our neighbours as ourselves.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a very happy Easter. We hope all Canadians, no matter their faith, find this a time of optimism, renewal, and new beginnings.

I was saddened to learn yesterday of the tragic deaths of the Honourable Jean Lapierre, his wife, members of his family, and the flight crew in a plane crash on the Îles-de-la-Madeleine.
As a former Member of Parliament, Minister, and media personality, Mr. Lapierre devoted his life to public service. His sudden death will leave a void in the political and media community – in Quebec and in the rest of Canada.
I was fortunate to meet with Jean on many occasions in the past. Our country will remember him as a skilled politician who was well known and loved by all. The commitment and devotion he demonstrated throughout his career will stay in our memories.
In these difficult times, we are reminded of just how precious life is. We must live every day to the fullest and seize every moment that is given to us. Sophie and I are devastated by these tragic events, and we extend our sincere condolences to all the victims’ families and friends.

Today, after 39 years of service, my National Security Advisor, Mr. Richard Fadden, will be retiring from the federal public service.
During his exceptional career, Mr. Fadden, Dick to friends and colleagues, was Deputy Minister of five different departments: National Defence; Canadian Security Intelligence Service; Citizenship and Immigration; Natural Resources; and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency.
On behalf of all Canadians, I wish Dick the very best in retirement and thank him for his distinguished record of service to his country.

A woman’s right to choose is a fundamental right in our country.
I welcome the leadership demonstrated by Premier MacLauchlan, who today announced that the PEI provincial government will move forward with access to reproductive services on the island.
The Government of Canada reaffirms its belief that a woman should have access to reproductive health services, no matter where they live in our country. 

The people of Saskatchewan have chosen to re-elect a government led by the Saskatchewan Party.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I offer my sincere congratulations to all elected Members of the Legislative Assembly, particularly Brad Wall who continues to have the honour and privilege to serve as Premier of this great province.
I look forward to working with the Government of Saskatchewan in a spirit of cooperation and collaboration. 

Today marks the anniversary of the founding of the World Health Organization (WHO), and highlights the global responsibility to promote better health.
Each year, World Health Day raises awareness about a specific public health priority. This year, World Health Day focuses on diabetes.
More and more people are diagnosed with diabetes each year, especially in low- and middle-income countries. Together with the WHO, the Government of Canada is committed to ongoing efforts to respond to this disease.
We all have a role to play in the improvement of our physical and mental health, and the overall health of our communities. When Canadians are healthy, they are happier, more productive, and can contribute more fully to our society.
Today, I encourage all Canadians to learn more about diabetes, its widespread effects, and the steps we can take to halt its rise and lead a healthier life.

The Battle of Vimy Ridge during the First World War was a moment that defined our nation.
It was the first time that soldiers from all four Canadian divisions—representing every region of our country—fought side-by-side on the same battlefield. As Brigadier-General Alexander Ross later said of Canada’s accomplishments at Vimy, ‘I witnessed the birth of a nation’.
The capture of Vimy Ridge was one of the Great War’s most remarkable military victories, but it came at great cost. Nearly 3,600 Canadians lost their lives and over 7,000 more were wounded.
As we mark the anniversary of this historic battle, we are reminded of our obligation—to the fallen, to our Veterans, and to their families—that we must meet with respect and gratitude. Our men and women in uniform have dedicated their lives to the defence of our country, and they deserve our unwavering support.
On this day, let us thank those who have sacrificed—and those who continue to sacrifice—on behalf of our country so that we can enjoy the peace and freedoms we have today. 

This week is National Volunteer Week, a time to celebrate and thank Canada’s 12.7 million volunteers for the selfless work they do to help those around them.
The theme for this year’s campaign—Volunteers are the roots of strong communities—recognizes that volunteers are at the heart of healthy and resilient communities.
We each have the power to make the world a better place. We can help a senior citizen who can no longer drive, mentor a young person in an after-school program, or welcome Syrian refugees to their new country. Volunteers look for opportunities to contribute their time, passion, and skill to make a positive difference in the lives of others. They believe—and know—that better is always possible.
On behalf of all Canadians, I want to thank all the volunteers who every day accomplish extraordinary things and make Canada a great place to live.

This week, the Sikh community in Canada and around the world will celebrate Vaisakhi, the holiest day in the Sikh calendar.
Vaisakhi celebrates the creation of the Khalsa by Guru Gobind Singh Ji in 1699. Friends and family will gather to read sacred texts at Gurdwaras and participate in lively Khalsa Day parades.
Sikhism is rooted in teachings of equality, unity, selfless service and social justice – the very values which we all strive to incorporate in our daily lives. Canada is proud to be home to one of the largest Sikh populations in the world, and we thank the community for the immense contributions it makes to our country.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating Vaisakhi a joyous celebration.
Waheguru Ji Ka Khalsa, Waheguru Ji Ki Fateh.

Today is New Year’s Day in the Tamil calendar, a day that will be celebrated in Canada and around the world.
Puthandu, also known as Varusha Pirappu, is a time for family and friends to feast, to exchange gifts, and to pray for blessings for the year to come at temples and churches.
As Tamils welcome the New Year, we are reminded of the many positive contributions that this community makes to our country. Canada is strong because of the many diverse and vibrant cultures that come together to form the base of its identity.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I wish all Tamils who celebrate Puthandu a happy and prosperous New Year.
Iniya Tamizh Puthaandu Nalvazhtukkal.

On behalf of the Government of Canada, I offer my sincere congratulations to Brian Pallister and the Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba on their electoral victory.
We look forward to working with the new provincial government in a spirit of cooperation and collaboration on issues of importance to Manitobans and all Canadians.
I also extend my heartfelt thanks to Greg Selinger for his contributions to the province and the country during his time as Premier, and wish him all the best in his future endeavours.

Today, Sophie, our children, and I join Canadians across the country to celebrate the 90th birthday of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada.
I am deeply mindful of Her Majesty’s long and tireless service to the Commonwealth and its citizens. Since Her Majesty acceded to the throne in 1952, Queen Elizabeth II has served with dignity, wisdom, and grace.
Over the past 64 years, Her Majesty has stood with Canada through key moments of our country’s history and, as our nation underwent change and transformation, has been a rock of stability and a steadfast keeper of tradition.
Today we admire her devotion to duty, and are thankful for her deeply-held affection for our country and unwavering loyalty to all Canadians.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II a happy 90th birthday, and continued health and happiness for many years to come.

Today is Earth Day. It is an opportunity for us to cherish and celebrate Canada’s natural beauty from coast to coast to coast. We also take this day to reflect on the impact that each and every one of us can – and must have – on the world around us.
We must protect our environment – clean air to breathe and clean water to drink means better health for all Canadians. The Government of Canada has already demonstrated leadership and courage as it tackles climate pollution. We have taken important steps with our partners to grow cleaner businesses, develop clean technologies, reduce the footprint of our resource sector, and protect our National Parks.
Climate change is the great global challenge of our time, but it is also an opportunity for those willing to solve it. Around the world, communities grapple with the complications of a rapidly changing environment. Strong action is needed to address the issues we face – and build a cleaner, stronger, and more sustainable world.
On this day, I encourage all Canadians to join us in our efforts to conserve and safeguard our natural environment. Every single Canadian has a role to play to protect our earth and leave our children a better world than the one we inherited from our parents.

Tonight at sundown, Jewish families across Canada and around the world will observe the beginning of Passover.
Families and friends will gather around the Seder table to share food and wine, eat matzah, and recount from the Haggadah the timeless story of the Exodus – one of humanity’s great stories of liberation.
Passover is a time to celebrate freedom, and reaffirm our commitment to face fear with hope, choose unity over division, and never lose faith in the better day that lies ahead.
As friends and families gather for this joyous celebration, we take this opportunity to recognize the tremendous contributions of Canada’s vibrant Jewish community to our great country.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those observing Passover in Canada and around the world.  
Chag Pesach Sameach!

I am outraged by the news that a Canadian citizen, John Ridsdel, held hostage in the Philippines since September 21, 2015, has been killed at the hands of his captors.
Canada condemns without reservation the brutality of the hostage-takers, and this unnecessary death. This was an act of cold-blooded murder and responsibility rests squarely with the terrorist group who took him hostage.
The Government of Canada is committed to working with the Government of Philippines and international partners to pursue those responsible for this heinous act and bring them to justice.
On behalf of the Government of Canada and all Canadians, I would like to express my deepest condolences to the family and friends of Mr. Ridsdel. They have endured a terrible ordeal, and this is a devastating moment for all of them. Our thoughts are with them as they come to terms with this loss, and I would ask that the media respect their privacy at this difficult time.
The Government of Canada’s first priority is the safety and security of its citizens. The Government of Canada will not comment or release any information which may compromise ongoing efforts or endanger the safety of the remaining hostages.

This weekend, people of Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, and Eastern Catholic faith in Canada and around the world will gather with loved ones to celebrate Easter.
On Sunday, friends and family will come together to enjoy the greatest of the feasts of the Orthodox Church – the feast of the Resurrection of the Lord.
Easter is a time to mark the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. It is also an opportunity to show appreciation and gratitude for all of the many blessings we enjoy, and to think of how we can extend more compassion and humanity to others in our communities and around the world.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those who are celebrating a very joyful Easter.

This week is Mental Health Week, an occasion for all Canadians to have a candid discussion about mental health and wellness and help put an end to the stigma around mental illness once and for all.
In Canada and around the world, many suffer in silence with an illness that is invisible to others. One in five Canadians will struggle with mental illness at some point in their lives. Too often, they hesitate to seek the help and support they need out of fear of discrimination or shame.
We all have a responsibility to raise our awareness about mental health. We must actively encourage honest and open conversations – in our homes, our workplaces, and our communities – about what mental health is and what we can do to increase our collective well-being. We must listen to our loved-ones, our colleagues, our friends, look out for signs and offer them support and advice in times of need. It can be a challenge for all of us to cope with the fast pace of life, daily stresses, and obligations. We all need to stand strong together.
This week, we also thank those who have publicly shared their personal struggles with mental health – including my own mother, Margaret. They are true examples of courage, bravery, and resilience. Their stories help us all become more understanding, more compassionate, and more empathetic.
Let us use our voices this week to help change the way society views mental health issues and those living with them. Now is the time to GET LOUD for mental health.

Tonight at sundown, Canadians and in particular, Jewish Canadians will commemorate the victims of the Holocaust. Between 1933 and 1945, approximately six million Jews were systematically murdered by the Nazis. Today, we honour the brave survivors, and recognize those who risked their lives to save others. 
The rituals of Yom HaShoah hold tremendous meaning for the Jewish community and many other Canadians. Tonight and tomorrow, in private homes, synagogues, and temples, families and friends will gather. Many will light a memorial candle, sing, pray for the victims, and recount the stories of Holocaust survivors.
Yom HaShoah is a time to reflect on the atrocities of one of the darkest chapters in human history. On this day, we also reaffirm our commitment to Holocaust remembrance and education. It is an opportunity to reiterate our steadfast commitment to fight anti-Semitism, racism, and all forms of discrimination – whenever and wherever they occur – so that such horrors never take place again.
On behalf of Sophie and our family, I extend my thoughts and prayers to all those observing Yom HaShoah.

Today, I speak for all Canadians when I say that our hearts go out to the families affected by this terrible fire. We are thinking of – and praying for – the people of Fort McMurray. Though Alberta’s loss is profound, we will get through this tragedy together: as friends, as neighbours, as Canadians.
I encourage everyone to make a donation to www.redcross.ca , and help the thousands of displaced residents of Fort McMurray.
The Government of Canada will match every dollar donated to the Canadian Red Cross in support of the Fort McMurray relief effort. Our commitment will apply to individual charitable donations made within Canada, it will be backdated to May 3rd, 2016, and it will continue until May 31st, 2016. There will be no financial cap on the federal government's contribution.
We applaud the Government of Alberta, who has also agreed to match donations. As a result, for every dollar donated by Canadians, the Red Cross will receive a total of $3.
The outpouring of goodwill and compassion we have already seen from Canadians across the country has not only been inspirational, but stands as a testament to who we are as a nation.
I would once again like to thank the many first responders who are working tirelessly, day and night, to fight this fire. To those who have lost so much: we are resilient, we are Canadians, and we will make it through this difficult time, together.

Today, we celebrate the 68th anniversary of the founding of the State of Israel with our Israeli friends and Jewish communities, both here in Canada, and around the world.
The State of Israel is a thriving and vibrant country, which Canada is proud to call a close partner and steadfast ally.
Canada and Israel unite in their people-to-people ties, shared values, respect for democracy, and growing trade relationship. I look forward to continuing to strengthen our strong friendship.
Although today is a joyous day, let us also reflect on the threat that Israel and its people continue to face throughout the world in the form of terrorist attacks, acts of anti-Semitism, and religious intolerance. Canada stands with Israel and will continue to promote peace and stability in the region.
On behalf of Sophie and our children, I wish everyone celebrating Israel’s Independence Day a Yom Ha’atzmaut Sameach. Shalom.

Today, I join Canadians – and people around the world – to recognize the International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia, and Biphobia.
Everyone deserves to live free of stigma, persecution, and discrimination – no matter who they are or whom they love. Today is about ensuring that all people – regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity – feel safe and secure, and empowered to freely express themselves.
On this important day, I encourage all Canadians to raise awareness, and mobilize to end the violence, prejudice, and judgement faced by LGBTQ2 persons.
As a society, we have taken many important steps toward recognizing and protecting the legal rights for the LGBTQ2 community – from enshrining equality rights in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms to the passage of the Civil Marriage Act. There remains much to be done, though. Far too many people still face harassment, discrimination, and violence for being who they are. This is unacceptable.
To do its part, the Government of Canada today will introduce legislation that will help ensure transgender and other gender-diverse people can live according to their gender identity, free from discrimination, and protected from hate propaganda and hate crimes.
Today, let us unite in a global celebration of diversity, and reaffirm our commitment to unequivocally defend LGBTQ2 rights as human rights. We will never stop fighting for a safer, more equal, and more just world for all of our children.

Today, we mark the anniversary of the end of the war in Sri Lanka in 2009. It is a time to honour, remember, and reflect on the victims of this 26-year war.
 
Over the past seven years, I have met many victims of this war, and have been deeply moved by their heroic stories of trauma and loss. Much work lies ahead to heal the wounds of all those who have suffered, and to achieve long-term peace and reconciliation on the island.
 
Tamil-Canadians are an integral part of our country and have overcome much adversity. I extend my deepest sympathy and support to Canadians of Tamil descent. 
 
I am encouraged that the Sri Lankan government is committed to working with the United Nations Human Rights Council and the international community towards seeking accountability in their country. A robust accountability mechanism must enlist the confidence of the victims of this war, through the meaningful engagement of foreign and Commonwealth investigators, prosecutors, and judges. Canada will continue to engage the international community in investigating and addressing serious violations of international law in Sri Lanka and around the world. We stand willing to assist the government of Sri Lanka in fulfilling this commitment. 

Today, Buddhists in Canada and around the world will celebrate the birth, enlightenment, and passing of Gautama Buddha – the founder of Buddhism.
On this day, Buddhists unite to reflect on the Buddha’s life and his teachings about showing compassion toward others. Vesak is celebrated in many different ways in many different countries all over the world.
Buddhists will visit their local temples to pray, donate to those in need, and put the teachings of the Buddha in practice. They will also offer gifts to the Buddha statue to show respect and gratitude to the Buddha for his life and wisdom.
As we celebrate the Buddha’s life and teachings, let us be inspired by his message, and continue to put the needs of others before our own. Let us continue our work in pursuit of happiness, peace, and equality for all Canadians and people around the world.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those observing this sacred day.

Today, we salute United Nations peacekeepers, past and present, who have dedicated their lives to the pursuit of peace, safety, and freedom for others. They have greatly sacrificed to provide hope and security for the most vulnerable persons around the globe.
Peacekeeping has a deep connection to Canadian values and leadership. The first UN peacekeeping mission came about in large part due to the efforts of Lester B. Pearson, our fourteenth Prime Minister, and the leadership of UN Forces Commander E.L.M. Tommy Burns. Together, their actions during the Suez Crisis of 1956 marked the beginning of Canada’s identity as a peacekeeping country.
Since then, UN peace operations have evolved from separating belligerents and monitoring cease fires to protecting vulnerable populations and working to establish the conditions for durable peace. As conflicts have grown in intensity and complexity, so too have the risks for UN peacekeepers who put their lives on the line for the safety of others.   
On behalf of all Canadians, I commend UN peacekeepers for their selfless work and tremendous contributions to the advancement of global peace and human rights. We will continue working with the UN to promote peace and the resolution of serious conflicts around the world.

Effective immediately, the Honourable Hunter Tootoo has resigned from his position as Minister of Fisheries, Oceans and the Canadian Coast Guard.
He will also be leaving the Liberal caucus.
Mr. Tootoo will be taking time to seek treatment for addiction issues.
The Honorable Dominic LeBlanc will be assuming the role of Minister of Fisheries, Oceans and the Canadian Coast Guard later this evening, in addition to being Government House Leader.

I learned with great sadness today that Len Marchand had passed away.
Mr. Marchand was a distinguished parliamentarian who held several senior positions including Parliamentary Secretary, Minister of State, Minister of the Environment and Senator. He was much admired by my father.
A member of the Okanagan Indian Band, Mr. Marchand was a tireless champion for a stronger role for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis in Canadian political life, as well as justice for Indigenous Peoples. He received several accolades for his work, including being appointed a member of the Order of Canada and the Order of British Columbia, and receiving the Queen Elizabeth II Golden Jubilee and Diamond Jubilee awards.
Mr. Marchand was a trailblazer for Indigenous involvement in Canadian politics and a champion of their rights. His legacy will live on in those he inspired and helped.
Len will be remembered for his strong convictions, his legendary sense of humour, and his tireless work to make Canada a better place for Indigenous Peoples.

Muslims in Canada and around the world will embark upon a month-long spiritual journey of fasting, prayer, and reflection to commemorate the revealing of the Qu’ran to the Prophet Muhammad.
During Ramadan, Muslims fast during daylight hours to increase their patience, closeness to God, and generosity towards those less fortunate. It is a time of community, when Muslims invite neighbours and friends to share their evening meal – iftar – recite prayers together, and encourage each other to give to charity. 
Ramadan reminds all of us to show appreciation for the countless blessings we enjoy and to put the needs of others before our own.
Let us take the time to recognize, and show gratitude for, the invaluable contributions of our Muslim communities that enrich our national fabric each and every day. Canada’s cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths and sources of pride.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those observing this holy month a blessed and peaceful Ramadan.
Ramadan Mubarak!

On behalf of all Canadians, I offer my deepest condolences to the family and friends of Gordie Howe, who passed away today at the age of 88. 
Gordie Howe was an incredible athlete who relentlessly pushed the limits of the game. His skill, toughness, dedication, and passion for hockey distinguished him as one of the greatest players in history.
Throughout his five-decade long career, Gordie Howe won six Hart Trophies as the National Hockey League’s most valuable player, six Art Ross Trophies as the league’s leading scorer, and four Stanley Cups with the Detroit Red Wings.
Gordie Howe was awarded the Order of Canada in 1971, and was inducted into 11 different halls of fame. His records, accomplishments, and accolades are without parallel in the history of hockey. He was truly one of a kind.
We will remember the legend, the man, and the many exciting hockey moments he provided to fans throughout his career.
Skate on, Mr. Hockey. You will be deeply missed.

This National Public Service Week, I invite Canadians to join me in celebrating our federal Public Service.
Every day, public servants work hard to strengthen the middle class and improve the lives of all Canadians. Their commitment ensures that we receive the services we need, no matter the pressures they face or the challenges before them.
The theme of National Public Service Week, ‘Proudly Serving Canadians,’ could not be more apt. Since last November, my team and I have seen the passion and dedication of Canada’s public servants in every task and project that they undertake. Whether helping resettle more than 25,000 Syrian refugees into Canada, or assisting the thousands of Canadians affected by the devastating wildfires in Fort McMurray, Canada’s public servants make a real difference – day in and day out – in the lives of Canadians and people around the world.  
Our public servants understand that to remain focused on the people we serve, we must work together to make openness and transparency key values of our institutions. They understand the need to renew and modernize so that together we can – effectively and efficiently – meet the needs of Canadians today and into the future.
Now is also the time to build and promote a welcoming and healthy federal Public Service environment in which public servants can access the support they need in times of personal crisis. A healthy workplace is a proud workplace – a dynamic, engaging, and appealing one to young Canadians looking for an exciting career that helps them make a real difference in the lives of others.
To public servants, I say thank you for all that you do to help us tackle the real challenges that we face as a country. You serve a vital role in our democracy, and are a source of pride and a model to other countries and governments. It is truly a privilege to work with you every single day.
I look forward to the great things we will achieve together for all Canadians.

This National Public Service Week, I invite Canadians to join me in celebrating our federal Public Service.
Every day, public servants work hard to strengthen the middle class and improve the lives of all Canadians. Their commitment ensures that we receive the services we need, no matter the pressures they face or the challenges before them.
The theme of National Public Service Week, ‘Proudly Serving Canadians,’ could not be more apt. Since last November, my team and I have seen the passion and dedication of Canada’s public servants in every task and project that they undertake. Whether helping resettle more than 25,000 Syrian refugees into Canada, or assisting the thousands of Canadians affected by the devastating wildfires in Fort McMurray, Canada’s public servants make a real difference – day in and day out – in the lives of Canadians and people around the world.  
Our public servants understand that to remain focused on the people we serve, we must work together to make openness and transparency key values of our institutions. They understand the need to renew and modernize so that together we can – effectively and efficiently – meet the needs of Canadians today and into the future.
Now is also the time to build and promote a welcoming and healthy federal Public Service environment in which public servants can access the support they need in times of personal crisis. A healthy workplace is a proud workplace – a dynamic, engaging, and appealing one to young Canadians looking for an exciting career that helps them make a real difference in the lives of others.
To public servants, I say thank you for all that you do to help us tackle the real challenges that we face as a country. You serve a vital role in our democracy, and are a source of pride and a model to other countries and governments. It is truly a privilege to work with you every single day.
I look forward to the great things we will achieve together for all Canadians.

It is with deep sadness that I have reason to believe that a Canadian citizen, Robert Hall, held hostage in the Philippines since September 21, 2015, has been killed by his captors.
While Canadian officials are working closely with authorities in the Philippines to formally confirm Mr. Hall’s death, we have compelling reason to believe that reports to this effect are, unfortunately, true.   
The vicious and brutal actions of the hostage-takers have led to a needless death.
Canada holds the terrorist group who took him hostage fully responsible for this cold-blooded and senseless murder.
With the tragic loss of two Canadians, I want to reiterate that terrorist hostage-takings only fuel more violence and instability. Canada will not give into their fear mongering tactics and despicable attitude toward the suffering of others.
This is precisely why the Government of Canada will not and cannot pay ransoms for hostages to terrorists groups, as doing so would endanger the lives of more Canadians.
We are more committed than ever to working with the Government of the Philippines and international partners to pursue those responsible for these heinous acts and bring them to justice, however long it takes.
The Government’s top priority, and my own as Prime Minister, is the safety and security of Canadian citizens.
On behalf of the Government of Canada and all Canadians, I would like to express my heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of Mr. Hall. 
They have suffered a terrible loss, and this is a devastating moment for them. Our thoughts are with them as they mourn this tragedy. I would ask that the media respect their privacy, and allow them time to come to terms with their loss.
Today marks yet another difficult day for Canada and for Canadians as we grieve as a nation for the loss of both John Ridsdel, who was killed on April 25, and Robert Hall.

I was deeply saddened to learn today of the passing of Gilles Lamontagne at the age of 97.
Mr. Lamontagne lived a bold and full life. His service to Canada started at a young age, when he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force during the Second World War and survived almost two years as a prisoner of war in Germany.
After distinguishing himself as a military officer, Mr. Lamontagne continued serving the public good. In a career that spanned more than 30 years, he served as Mayor of Quebec City, Member of Parliament, Parliamentary Secretary, Minister of various federal departments, and Lieutenant-Governor of Quebec. In all capacities, he served with exemplary dedication and compassion.
For his efforts, Mr. Lamontagne was named an Officer of the Order of Canada, a Knight of the Ordre national du Québec, a Knight of the French Legion of Honor, and received the Diamond Jubilee medal.
On a personal level, I will remember Gilles mostly through the stories told by my father – of their time spent together in Montreal as teenagers and of his strong moral compass.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of this remarkable man. We join Quebecers and all Canadians in mourning the passing of this great man.

Today, let us promise to never forget the dignity and potential in the lives of all those fleeing persecution and conflict, and honour the commitment of those who help them.
This year, World Refugee Day marks a somber milestone. An estimated 60 million people are now refugees, asylum seekers, or internally displaced persons. Over half of these people are children.
In a time of economic uncertainty and tightening security, it is easy for countries to shy away from the plight of those seeking shelter from conflict and persecution. We must do better than that, and lead with open minds and warm hearts, not closed borders and cold indifference.
Canada was built by those who fled oppression and war, who left everything behind to start anew in a strange and faraway land. We are a nation of millions of immigrants and refugees, of hundreds of cultures, languages, and religions, who are bound by one, unwavering, unshakable belief: we are stronger not in spite of our differences, but precisely because of them.
We have a proud history of opening our arms – and our borders – to those in need: from Hungarian refugees in the 1950s to Ismaili Muslim refugees in the 1970s to Vietnamese boat people in the 1980s.
Today, Canadians continue to open their homes and hearts to refugees fleeing Syria. Since December, Canada has welcomed more than 25,000 Syrian refugees into communities across the country. Another 15,000 privately-sponsored refugees will arrive in Canada by the end of the year because of the compassion and generosity of Canadians.
As a country, we have had some deeply regrettable moments, like Komagata Maru, St. Louis, and the Chinese Exclusion Act. But the history of our nation is one in which we constantly challenge ourselves, and each other, to extend our personal definitions of who is a Canadian.
As Canadians, let us recognize our responsibility to continue opening our doors and lending a welcoming hand to our most vulnerable neighbours around the world during their time of greatest need. Let us give the refugees who arrive in Canada the opportunity to build a new, more hopeful life for themselves, like Canadians did before us, and Canadians did before them.
Today, tomorrow, and all the days to come, let us show the world that Canada truly is the compassionate, generous country that we know it to be.

Today, on National Aboriginal Day, let us take the time to celebrate and honour the unique heritage and outstanding achievements of the Indigenous peoples in Canada.
National Aboriginal Day is first and foremost an occasion to celebrate the fundamental role First Nations, Métis, and Inuit have played – and continue to play – in shaping the identity of all Canadians. Coast to coast to coast, their remarkable art and cultures, significant contributions and history, are essential to our sense of nationhood.
Events over the past few months – including the loss of life to suicide and the feelings of despair felt in some communities – remind us that we must work in genuine partnership with Indigenous peoples, the provinces, and the territories to better support the well-being of children and families, improve the quality of education for Indigenous students, and ensure health services meet the needs of Indigenous communities.
No relationship is more important to our government and to Canada than the one with Indigenous peoples. Today, we reaffirm our government’s commitment to a renewed nation-to-nation relationship between Canada and Indigenous peoples, one based on the recognition of rights, respect, trust, co-operation, and partnership.
We understand the importance of reconciliation and the process of truth-telling and healing in this renewal. With this is mind, we will continue the vital work of reconciliation as outlined in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission Calls to Action, in partnership with First Nations, the Métis Nation, the Inuit, the provinces, and the territories. This work will build on our commitment last month to fully adopt and implement the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
Together, we will think seven generations out – as the Iroquois have taught – as we listen to Indigenous voices on environmental matters, build necessary roads, bridges, and water and wastewater infrastructure, and ensure a better and brighter future for Indigenous peoples in Canada.
I invite you to join the #IndigenousReads campaign to help raise awareness and understanding through shared culture and stories and encourage steps toward reconciliation with Indigenous peoples.

31 years ago, our country suffered the worst mass murder in its history when 329 innocent people on board Air India Flight 182 were killed by a terrorist bomb. Canadians were directly impacted by this senseless and brutal act of violence that left them grieving parents, children, relatives, friends, and colleagues.
On this solemn day, Canadians across the country stand in solidarity with all those who have experienced first-hand the incredible pain of losing a loved one to terrorism.
The recent cold-blooded murders of fourteen Canadian Embassy security guards in Kabul, the two Canadian hostages in the Philippines, as well as the terrorist attacks which resulted in six Canadian deaths in Burkina Faso and another in Indonesia, are a stark reminder that we are not immune to the threat of terrorism – which can strike anywhere, anytime.
Terrorism is used to instill fear and designed to make us question not only our own safety, but also the democratic institutions that keep us safe. 
This is exactly why Canada will continue to work closely with our allies – and the international community – to help fight extremism and terrorism, both at home and abroad. We remain committed and vigilant in the Global Coalition’s fight against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We thank the brave women and men of our military, intelligence agencies, and local law enforcement that keep Canadians safe every day.
We will continue to promote and defend human rights, justice and equality – values that are vital tools in the fight against intolerance, hatred, and fear. No act of harm or destruction will ever be greater than our perseverance and resolve. 
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I extend our deepest condolences to those who have lost loved ones to terrorism. We mourn with you and vow to never forget those who have been lost.

The people of the UK have chosen to leave the EU.
The UK and the EU are important strategic partners for Canada with whom we enjoy deep historical ties and common values. We will continue to build relations with both parties as they forge a new relationship.
Canada’s connections to our partners around the world are among its greatest assets, and these relationships contribute greatly to the prosperity of all Canadians.
Canada has tremendous economic fundamentals that we are strengthening with key investments in infrastructure and measures to grow our middle class. We are well positioned to weather global market uncertainty as we have done in the past.
Prime Minister David Cameron indicated today that he will resign by the fall. On behalf of all Canadians, I would like to thank him for being such a close ally and good friend to our country. We wish him well.

Today, on la Fête nationale du Québec, we celebrate the vibrant history of Québec and the unique culture and identity of its people. As a Quebecer, I take enormous pride in my province’s creativity, strength, and character.
June 24th also marks Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day, an occasion for all Francophones across the country to celebrate our proud traditions and history.
On this day, we pay homage to the French language and our French-Canadian heritage. Both have played a vital role in shaping our country, and defining who we are as Canadians.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all Quebecers and Canadians celebrating la Fête nationale du Québec and Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day.

I join Canadians across the country today to celebrate multiculturalism, and our long and proud tradition of inclusion and diversity.
As the first country in the world to adopt a policy of multiculturalism 45 years ago, Canada has shown time and time again that a country can be stronger not in spite of its differences, but because of them.
As Canadians, we appreciate the immense freedom we have to show pride in our individual identities and ancestries. No matter our religion, where we were born, what colour our skin, or what language we speak, we are equal members of this great country.
Our roots reach out to every corner of the globe. We are from far and wide, and speak over 200 languages. Our national fabric is vibrant and varied, woven together by many cultures and heritages, and underlined by a core value of respect. Multiculturalism is our strength, as synonymous with Canada as the Maple Leaf.
Today, let us celebrate multiculturalism as a vital component of our national fabric, and let us express gratitude to Canadians of all backgrounds who have made, and who continue to make, such valuable contributions to our country.          

Beaumont Hamel is a name that is seared into the hearts of all Newfoundlanders and Labradorians. It is a name that represents courage, sacrifice, and sorrow.
One hundred years ago to this very day – in what would become the bloodiest battle of the First World War – 810 young men from the Newfoundland Regiment were ordered out of their trench. They calmly advanced, under withering machine gun and artillery fire, across no man’s land and into the teeth of the enemy.
As one major wrote: ‘The only visible sign the men knew they were under such terrifying shell fire was that they tucked their chins into an advanced shoulder as they had so often done when fighting their way home against a Newfoundland blizzard.’
Of the 810 men who went ‘over the top’, only 68 would stand for roll call the following morning. It was a loss that has echoed down through the generations, and it is this loss – this sacrifice – that we remember today. It is their sacrifice that has allowed us to build this strong, free, and diverse country that we hold so dear.
On this day, as our fellow Canadians gather to celebrate the maple leaf and everything it stands for, let us also remember the caribou, the brave men of the Newfoundland Regiment, and the ideals for which they fought.
While we can never repay this debt, we can honour and remember all those who have served and continue to serve and protect our great nation.

Before July 1, 1867, there was a Canada West and a Canada East. There was an Upper Canada and a Lower Canada. There was always a division. Today, we celebrate the day, exactly 149 years ago, when the people of this great land came together, and forged one nation, one country – Canada.
From the outset, Canada was formed not in spite of differences, but because of them. Thanks to the hard work and understanding between many cultural and religious communities, Canada is the diverse, inclusive, and compassionate country that we are fortunate to call home today.
This Canada Day, let us celebrate our shared Canadian identity and take pride in everything we have achieved together since Confederation. We stand as a testament to the fact that a prosperous and hopeful nation can be as united as it is diverse.
Coast to coast to coast, Canadians share many values – values like kindness, generosity, and respect. Whether we are fundraising for Fort Mac, or welcoming Syrian refugees into our communities, we support each other in our times of need. We stand together.
Today, let us resolve to make our country better for our children and grandchildren, and remember that Canada will only be at its best when we all succeed.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish you and your loved ones a very happy Canada Day.

Today, Muslims in Canada and around the world will gather to celebrate the end of the holy month of Ramadan and to give thanks for the spiritual renewal and many blessings received throughout the holy month.
Eid al-Fitr is a time to strengthen family ties, renew friendships, and show compassion and humanity towards those in need both in local communities and around the world.
To mark this important occasion, Muslims attend special morning prayers, exchange greetings and gifts, and share a special celebratory meal - their first daytime meal in a month. 
On this day, let us thank Canada’s vibrant Muslim community for its tremendous contributions to the shaping and building of our great nation. Our cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths, and a source of pride.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to all those celebrating Eid al-Fitr in Canada and around the world.
Eid Mubarak! 

Today, we pause in solemn remembrance of those whose lives were lost, and in support of those whose lives were irreparably changed by the tragic events that took place in Lac-Mégantic on July 6, 2013.
In the face of unimaginable pain and loss, the people of Lac-Mégantic have shown incredible resilience and courage. A few months ago, when the community of Fort McMurray was devastated by wildfires, the community of Lac-Mégantic reached out with an immediate outpouring of support. Canadians continue to be deeply moved by the strength and selflessness of the people of Lac-Mégantic, who lent a hand to distant neighbours, even while their own efforts to rebuild continue.
Rail safety remains a top priority for the Government of Canada, and we will continue to take steps to improve the safety of the Canadian rail system. The Minister of Transport, Marc Garneau, visited Lac-Mégantic in April to hear from those most directly affected by the tragedy.
To the people of Lac-Mégantic, please know that you have our steadfast support as you continue to recover and heal. We remember you and all that you lost, and will use this memory to strengthen our resolve to make our railroads the safest in the world, and ensure the tragic events of Lac-Mégantic never happen again. 

Today, we join Shia Ismaili Muslims in Canada and around the world to celebrate His Highness Prince Karim Aga Khan IV, who on this day in 1957 became Imam—spiritual leader—of the Shia Imami Ismaili Muslims.
In the almost 60 years since, the Aga Khan has demonstrated a tireless and admirable dedication to the common good. His achievements and contributions toward improving the lives of some of the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people are immeasurable.
Above all, he has demonstrated the importance of being a good global citizen and the value of helping others, regardless of their origin or religion, to reach their full potential.
The values promoted by the Aga Khan—pluralism, compassion, inclusion, respect for diversity, and human rights—are those that we as Canadians hold dear, and we are honoured to call him a friend, and to host here in Canada both the Global Centre for Pluralism and the only Islamic Museum in North America—the Aga Khan Museum in Toronto.
On this day, we thank the Aga Khan for being a true humanitarian, and for inspiring us all to show more kindness and generosity of heart to others.
Kushiali Mubarak.

On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to extend my warm congratulations to the United Kingdom’s new Prime Minister, Theresa May.
Prime Minister May has dedicated her life – and her career – to public service. She has sat as a Member of Parliament since 1997, and, more recently, has become one of the longest serving Home Secretaries in the United Kingdom’s history.
Canada and the United Kingdom are not only important strategic partners and allies, we share a deep friendship – a rich and diverse relationship built and maintained through our strong people-to-people ties and our shared history. We look forward to working closely with Prime Minister May as we continue to address issues of mutual interest that will ensure ongoing stability and prosperity for all of our people.
I would also like to thank David Cameron for his service and dedication to the people of the United Kingdom, especially during times of economic uncertainty. I wish him the best of luck in all his future endeavours.
I was heartbroken to learn of the many dozens of innocent victims who were killed or injured as a result of today’s terrorist attack that targeted Bastille Day celebrations in Nice, France.
On behalf of all Canadians, I extend my deepest condolences to the families and friends of those who were killed. We also wish a speedy recovery to the many more that were injured.
Canada and France are the closest of friends, and we stand by the French people as they face this terrible ordeal. We have offered all possible assistance to the French Government.
Senseless acts like this one are not isolated events, and we will continue to work with our Allies and partners to fight terrorism in all of its forms. We will bring those who are responsible to justice, whether they be the perpetrators, or those involved in funding or organizing such attacks.
Our thoughts and prayers are with the people of France at this very difficult time. We mourn the loss of so many innocent victims.
***IMPORTANT***
We are still in the process of determining whether any Canadians have been impacted by this event with local authorities.
Canadian citizens in France requiring emergency consular assistance should contact the Embassy of Canada (https://travel.gc.ca/assistance/embassies-consulates/france)  or call Global Affairs Canada's 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre collect at +1 613 996-8885. An email can also be sent to sos@international.gc.ca.
Friends and relatives in Canada of Canadian citizens known to be in the area can contact Global Affairs Canada's 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre by calling 613-996-8885 or 1-800-387-3124, or by sending an email to sos@international.gc.ca.

On behalf of all Canadians, I would like to express our concern about this evening's events in Turkey. We call for restraint by all parties. Canada supports the preservation of Turkish democracy, and condemns any attempt to subvert Turkey's democratic institutions by force of arms.
The Government of Canada is being kept informed of developments in Turkey, and we are doing everything possible to ensure that the safety and security of Canadians in that country is maintained.

On this 33rd anniversary, we join Canadians of Tamil descent and members of the Tamil community around the world in commemoration of the events of Black July in 1983.
Let us pause to remember the victims of the anti-Tamil pogroms and all the lives that were lost throughout the entirety of the Sri Lankan Civil War. We offer our deepest condolences to those who lost family and friends.
The war and the devastation it wrought reminds us to heal the wounds of those who have suffered, and to promote unity over division and inclusion over prejudice.
Canada will continue to encourage the Sri Lankan government to fulfill its commitment to the United Nations Human Rights Council to bring about real peace, reconciliation, accountability and justice for the people in Sri Lanka.

On June 25, 1950, Communist armies from the North charged across the 38th Parallel and invaded South Korea. Over the next several years, more than 26,000 Canadians – many veterans of the Second World War, and some still teenagers – left behind their loved ones to defend a country half a world away.
The Korean War would become one of the dirtiest, bloodiest, and deadliest conflicts in Canadian history. The brutal combat was reminiscent of the First World War: soldiers dug out trenches by hand, and lived between four walls of dirt for weeks – sometimes months – on end. The harshest battle was often not against enemy forces, but unforgiving weather: frigid winds and bitter cold that turned food into ice, and relentless rains that dissolved land into mud and muck. 
Sixty-three years ago today, the combat phase of the Korean War ended in armistice. The cost of the war was heavy, with two and half million victims. 516 Canadians made the ultimate sacrifice. Many more came home bearing the scars of war. Approximately 7,000 Canadians continued to serve in the tense theatre of operations between the signing of the Armistice and the end of 1955.
We are proud of the role Canada played, along with our United Nations allies, to defend the sovereignty of South Korea. Because of our Korean War Veterans, fifty million South Koreans now live in a peaceful and prosperous nation. Their courage and sacrifice helped to change the course of history.
Today, I urge all Canadians to learn more about Canada’s role in resolving the combat phase of the Korean War. I also call on all citizens to join me in expressing our heartfelt gratitude to all those from our military, and their families who support them, who have fought, and continue to fight, so courageously to defend the principles of peace, freedom, and democracy around the world.

We are delighted by the Governor General’s announcement that Their Royal Highnesses, The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, will visit Canada this fall. During their stay, the Duke and Duchess will travel to British Columbia and Yukon on a visit that will showcase some of Canada’s finest natural beauty.
This Royal Tour, the second undertaken by Their Royal Highnesses to Canada, also presents a unique opportunity for Canadians of all backgrounds to meet with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and learn more about our heritage, traditions, and institutions.
Our government looks forward to providing Canadians with further details closer to the beginning of the Royal Tour.

With the parade of athletes into Maracanã Stadium in Rio, the world will come together to celebrate excellence, friendship, and respect in sport with the official opening of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games.
I am sure that we will continue to be inspired throughout the entire 19 days of the competition by spectacular moments of strength, speed, skill, and perseverance as athletes from around the world compete for a spot on the Olympic podium. These athletes, along with their coaches, families, and friends, have sacrificed so much to reach this level, and to embody the Olympic motto – Citius – Altius – Fortius (Faster, Higher, Stronger).
On behalf of all Canadians, I extend my heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to our athletes who have displayed such tremendous dedication and commitment. They motivate us—especially our young people—to be more active in sport, whether it is in our own backyards, in local parks, or in sport venues from coast to coast to coast. We are very proud of each and every one of them, and confident that they will be excellent ambassadors of Canada’s culture, athleticism, and values.
We, Team Canada—35 million people strong—will be watching and cheering on 314 Canadian athletes at the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. Good luck and make us proud!

Canada has a long and proud history of peacekeeping. For decades, brave Canadian women and men have put themselves in harm’s way to protect the world’s most vulnerable civilians – including women, children, and marginalized groups.
On National Peacekeepers’ Day, we celebrate all those – past and present – who have worked selflessly to advance the cause of peace, democracy, human rights, and the rule of law around the world.
Since the days of Lester B. Pearson, the members of our military and police forces – as well as many Canadian civilians – have made concrete contributions to the pursuit of hope and security in international conflict zones. These individuals stand for the very best of what it means to be Canadian.
Moving forward, we will increase Canada’s support to United Nations peace operations: providing more personnel and training to UN peace support missions; increasing our conflict prevention, mediation, and peacebuilding efforts; advancing the roles of women and youth in the promotion of peace and security; and supporting UN reform efforts to make peace support initiatives more effective.
Finally, on this day, let us pay tribute to the many Canadians who made the ultimate sacrifice during peacekeeping operations in distant lands so that both local populations and Canadians alike could enjoy a more peaceful world. We will remember and honour their selfless contributions to humanity.

International Youth Day is an opportunity for people around the world to reflect on contributions by youth – both past and present – to making the world a better place.
The theme of this year’s International Youth Day is eradicating poverty and achieving sustainable production and consumption. These global challenges demand fresh thinking and renewed vision. No one is ever too young to be a leader, and seek the answers that could combat climate change, build fairer, more inclusive societies, and change the world.
Canadian youth have innovative ideas and new perspectives on how we should address the opportunities and challenges of our day. That is why we established the Prime Minister’s Youth Council to ensure we hear, at the highest level of government, what young people have to say. Youth issues are everyone’s issues, and youth should have a voice in decisions that will affect them for the rest of their lives.
On this day, and every day, I encourage young people to initiate and lead the change we seek and need now. Be the leaders of today. There is no reason to wait until tomorrow.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all those marking the occasion a happy and inspiring International Youth Day.

Today, we join the Pakistani community – here in Canada, in Pakistan, and around the world – in celebrating Pakistan’s 70th Independence Day.
I look forward to working with Prime Minister Sharif to further strengthen the relationship between our two countries, and to working together on global issues including, peace, security, and development cooperation.
On this day, I invite all Canadians to recognize the tremendous contributions that the Pakistani-Canadian community has made – and continues to make – to our great country. We know that Canada is a stronger and more resilient nation because of its diversity.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating today a happy and festive Independence Day.

Today, we join the people of India and members of the Indo-Canadian community in celebrating India's 70th Independence Day.
Canada and India unite in our shared traditions of democracy and diversity. Together, our nations stand as a testament to the fact that countries can prosper not in spite of their diversity, but precisely because of it.
It has been a pleasure to meet with Prime Minister Modi, and I look forward to working together to further strengthen the relationship between our two countries, and to collaborating on global issues, including peace and security, climate change, and gender equality.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the significant contributions that Indo-Canadians have made to our national fabric, and wish all those celebrating today a happy Independence Day.

Today, we celebrate the unique history and rich culture of the Acadian people, and recognize the important contributions they have made to our society and our history.
Acadian roots run centuries deep and stretch long past Confederation. In the early 1600s, Acadians established the first French settlements in what would eventually become Canada. Since then, Acadians have played a significant role in shaping the country we all call home.
Despite many hardships, Acadians have showed strength in maintaining their distinct identity over the centuries. Their determination and resilience have been visible throughout history, and have preserved a vibrant culture, a rich set of customs, and a beautiful language that continue to enrich our country today.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to learn more about the Acadia of past and present, and wish all those celebrating today a happy and memorable National Acadian Day.


Today, we join the people of the Republic of Korea and members of the Korean-Canadian community in celebrating the 71st anniversary of Korea's independence, also known as ‘Gwangbokjeol,’ or ‘Restoration of Light Day.’
Over sixty years ago, thousands of Canadians fought in the Korean War in the defence of the Republic of Korea. Since then, our two countries have enjoyed a close and friendly relationship, based on our shared history, common values, and robust economic ties.
I look forward to working with President Park to further build upon our commercial relations and warm friendship.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the significant contributions Canadians of Korean descent have made to our national fabric, and wish all those celebrating today a happy Independence Day.


Today, we join the people of the Republic of Korea and members of the Korean-Canadian community in celebrating the 71st anniversary of Korea's independence, also known as ‘Gwangbokjeol,’ or ‘Restoration of Light Day.’
Over sixty years ago, thousands of Canadians fought in the Korean War in the defence of the Republic of Korea. Since then, our two countries have enjoyed a close and friendly relationship, based on our shared history, common values, and robust economic ties.
I look forward to working with President Park to further build upon our commercial relations and warm friendship.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the significant contributions Canadians of Korean descent have made to our national fabric, and wish all those celebrating today a happy Independence Day.


On this day – 74 years ago – thousands of Canadian soldiers, alongside Allied forces, launched a raid on the German-occupied port of Dieppe.
Canadian and Allied infantry faced heavy resistance as soon as they landed. They fought through barbed wire, mortar barrages, and machine gun fire. Many never made it beyond the beach where they landed.
In the air, Royal Air Force and Royal Canadian Air Force fighters and bombers waged one of the most intense air battles in the whole war.
After nine hours of fighting, Canadian and Allied forces withdrew.
The operation came at a steep price for Canada. More than 3,300 Canadians were killed, wounded, or taken prisoner.
These sacrifices were not made in vain. The raid on Dieppe led to a better understanding of enemy defences and laid the groundwork for future Allied amphibious assaults – including D-Day.
On this solemn day, we honour the courage and sacrifice of the thousands of Canadians who fought alongside Allied forces in Dieppe.
Let us remember those who gave so much so that we could enjoy the peace and freedoms that we do today.

As the 2016 Rio Summer Olympics draw to a close, I would like to thank all athletes from around the world for making these such exciting games.
On behalf of the whole country, I congratulate Canadian athletes on your remarkable achievements. We know your success would not have been possible without the tremendous support of your coaches, support teams, families, friends, and communities. We are very proud of all of you.
During the past 19 days, Canadian Olympians – both veterans and newcomers – produced many memorable Olympic moments.
Canadians, especially our young women and girls, were incredibly inspired by our female Olympians who were a force to be reckoned with throughout the Games. I know the impact of our athletes’ accomplishments will live on and be replayed in playgrounds and on sport fields for many, many years to come.
On behalf of all Canadians, I extend my thanks and congratulations to Brazil for hosting a wonderful Olympic Games. We eagerly look forward to the Rio 2016 Paralympic Games, starting on September 7, 2016, where incredible athleticism from around the world will once more be on display.

Today, we honour the victims and survivors of Communism and Nazism in Europe, and all those around the world who continue to endure and fight against the oppression of totalitarian regimes. 
Black Ribbon Day marks the anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact. This pact, signed in 1939 between the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, allowed for the illegal political and territorial rearrangement of Eastern and Central Europe.
In the years that followed, millions of people were robbed of their homes and suffered untold atrocities at the hands of the Soviet and Nazi regimes.
Many of those who came to Canada to escape these regimes still bear the scars of the unspeakable acts committed against them and their loved ones. These Canadians and their descendants have made remarkable contributions to our country, and continue to strengthen our national fabric. We must never forget their stories.
Today, we express solidarity with all victims of totalitarian regimes and reiterate Canada’s unwavering commitment to the principles of justice, democracy, and universal human rights. We remember this dark period of history to ensure that the world never again lets such tyranny go unopposed.

Today, we join the Ukrainian community—here in Canada and around the world—to celebrate the 25thanniversary of Ukraine’s independence.
Canada is proud to have been the first western country to recognize Ukraine’s declaration of independence in 1991. The vibrant Ukrainian-Canadian community—nearly 1.3 million people strong—has contributed immeasurably to building Canada, and has helped forge a strong, enduring relationship between both of our countries.
During my recent official visit to the country, I was reminded of our deep historical ties and our shared desire for a prosperous future for Ukrainians and Canadians. I was moved by the sacrifices that Ukrainians have made, and continue to make, for their freedom, democracy, and independence.
As we mark this momentous occasion, we reiterate our strong support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Canada fully supports Ukraine as it takes important steps to bring greater security, prosperity, and economic independence to its people.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish everyone celebrating a happy Ukrainian Independence Day.
Slava Ukraini!

On this day – 25 years ago – Canada re-established diplomatic ties with Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, after the three Baltic states declared independence from the Soviet Union.
Since then, our countries have enjoyed a dynamic and friendly relationship, rooted in the shared values of democracy and freedom, and our partnership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Canada never recognized the Soviet Union’s occupation of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, and always supported their struggle to restore independence during decades of Soviet occupation.
Canada looks forward to further strengthening its relations with Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, and working with them on bilateral and regional issues, including support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. This includes Canada’s recent commitment to lead a robust multinational NATO battlegroup in Latvia, as part of NATO’s enhanced Forward Presence in Eastern Europe. We will continue working closely with our NATO Allies ? including those in the Baltics ? to ensure our citizens can continue to live in safety and security. 
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the tremendous contributions of Canadians of Estonian, Latvian, and Lithuanian descent to our national fabric, and offer our best wishes to everyone celebrating today.

Today, we commemorate Labour Day – an occasion to celebrate the many accomplishments of Canada’s labour movement.
For more than a century, the labour movement has played an integral role in improving the lives of Canadian workers, and protecting Canada’s middle class and those working hard to join it. In the face of great adversity, the labour movement has fought to ensure fair living wages, safe working conditions, an inclusive workplace, and equitable relations with employers.  
The Government of Canada is committed to collaborating with the labour movement to ensure that working people are protected and supported during their entire careers and retirement. That is why we worked hard with the provinces and territories and achieved an agreement in principle to expand the Canada Pension Plan, invested more than $85 million in union-based apprenticeship training, and temporarily increased Employment Insurance benefits for workers hit hardest by the commodities downturn. We have also committed to repair and build roads and bridges, and other infrastructure across Canada, which will create better, well-paying jobs for union members and more livable communities for Canadian families.
We are working to restore fair and balanced labour laws that acknowledge the important role of unions in promoting and protecting Canada’s middle class and those working hard to join it, and improve workers’ access to good quality skills training.
Moving forward, we will amend the Canada Labour Code to allow federally regulated workers the right to formally request flexible work arrangements from their employers.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish all Canadians a safe and happy Labour Day.


Tonight, we join more than 160 countries from around the world to celebrate the opening of the Rio 2016 Paralympic Summer Games.
Over the course of the next 11 days, Canadians from coast to coast to coast will watch and cheer the 162 world-class athletes representing our country in 19 different sports. We are confident that these athletes will show the world what it means to be Canadian as they proudly wear the Maple Leaf and push for the podium.
The drive and dedication that these athletes, coaches, and support staff have shown to make it to the highest level of sport competition is impressive – and now the entire world will have the privilege of watching them as they strive for their personal bests and embody in every way the international Paralympic motto of ‘Spirit in Motion’.
I join all Canadians – the team behind the team, #35Mstrong – in wishing the very best to all of the athletes in Rio, and to thank them for inspiring all of us, especially our young people, to always strive for excellence. Go Canada!

Today, we mark the 15th anniversary of the terrorist attacks in the United States that killed nearly 3,000 innocent victims – including 24 Canadians.
On this solemn day, we join with the families and friends of the victims to remember and honour those who fell. We also offer our heartfelt support to those still struggling with the physical and emotional injuries they sustained on 9/11.
We recognize the extraordinary courage and bravery of the first responders on that day and the days that followed. We honour the EMTs, the firefighters, the police officers, and all those who ran toward the sounds of danger and the plumes of smoke, risking their lives so others might live.
While 9/11 will long be remembered as a day of destruction and terror, let us also remember it for the remarkable humanity that was shown in such a tragic time. May we never forget the countless Canadians, from coast to coast to coast, who opened their hearts and their homes to those affected by the attacks.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage Canadians to remember the tremendous outpouring of goodwill shown on 9/11 by participating in charitable and community activities, and other worthy causes across the country, as part of the National Day of Service.

Today, Coptic Orthodox Christians in Canada and around the world will welcome the New Year and celebrate the Feast of Nayrouz.
The Feast of Nayrouz—also known as the Feast of Rivers—began as a day of thanksgiving to welcome the rising waters of the Nile which provided farmers with essential irrigation for their crops. On this day, Coptic Christians gather to pray, exchange gifts, and visit with family and friends.
Most importantly, the New Year is a time to honour all those who sacrificed so much—including their lives—for their faith during years of intense persecution in Egypt while under Roman rule. Their courage, steadfastness, and unwavering dedication to their faith in the face of oppression continue to serve as an example to Coptic Christians today.
Today, we extend our heartfelt thanks for the many contributions Coptic Christian communities have made to Canada. We wish all those celebrating a joyful Feast, and a peaceful and healthy start to the New Year.
Happy Nayrouz!

Today, Muslims in Canada and around the world will gather to celebrate Eid al-Adha, which marks the end of the Hajj.
Eid al-Adha is an opportunity for prayer, forgiveness, and celebration. Friends and family will gather to attend morning prayers, share a celebratory meal, exchange greetings and gifts, reflect on lessons of sacrifice, and show compassion to those in need.
It is on days like today that we are reminded of the values that bring all Canadians together – those of peace, empathy, family, and friendship.
Today also serves as an opportunity for us all to recognize the invaluable contributions of our thriving Muslim community that enrich our national fabric each and every day. No matter our faith, culture, or country, we are reminded that our diversity is Canada’s greatest strength.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I extend our best wishes to Muslims in Canada and around the world who are celebrating Eid al-Adha, and congratulate those performing the Hajj this year.
Eid Mubarak!

Ten years ago, senseless acts of violence were committed at Dawson College in Montréal, when a shooter opened fire on innocent students, killing one young woman and injuring 16 other people. In the aftermath of these tragic events, a whole community was left grieving and in a state of shock.
On this sad anniversary, we remember and honour the memory of the victims of this tragedy. Our thoughts are with the victims, their loved ones, and all those whose lives were forever changed that day.
The Government of Canada’s top priority is to protect Canadians. We condemn all forms of violence and consider all attacks designed to spread fear and kill innocent people to be unacceptable.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I join Canadians from across the country in paying tribute to the victims of this tragedy.

Today, Canadians of Chinese, Korean, Japanese, and Vietnamese heritage will celebrate the Mid-Autumn Festival, also known as the Moon Festival.
The festival is a time to celebrate the harvest, and give thanks for the year’s successes.
To mark this joyous occasion, families and loved ones get together, light colorful lanterns, share traditional mooncakes, exchange greetings and gifts, and admire the spectacular beauty of the full moon.
This celebration serves as a reminder of the rich and vibrant diversity that is at the core of our country’s identity.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I offer our best wishes to everyone celebrating today.

We are delighted that Kevin Garratt has returned safely to Canada and is with his family once more.
We remain deeply impressed by the grace and resilience of the Garratt family, especially Kevin and Julia.
The Government of Canada has been seized of this case at the highest levels. We want to thank consular officials who work behind the scenes every day in support of Canadians abroad.
We ask all to respect the family’s wish for privacy at this time.

As the Paralympic Games draw to a close, I invite all Canadians to reflect on the incredible performances of our athletes over the last eleven days.
We watched from coast to coast to coast with excitement as they competed against the best in the world. Our Paralympians have reminded us of what can be accomplished with hard work, relentless passion, and the tremendous support of coaches, families, friends, and communities.
These athletes showed Canada and the world their determination, spirit, and sportsmanship. They have inspired all Canadians, including young people living with disabilities.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I extend my thanks to all Paralympians and to the people of Brazil on making these such memorable Games. I also encourage all Canadians to provide our returning athletes with the warmest of welcomes home and to celebrate what they have accomplished during the Rio 2016 Paralympic Games.

Canada and the Republic of Armenia enjoy a dynamic and friendly relationship, rooted in the shared values of democracy and freedom, bilateral relations, and our collaboration in international organizations such as La Francophonie.
I look forward to working with President Serzh Sargsyan and newly-appointed Prime Minister Karen Karapetyan to further strengthen the relations between our two countries, and to work together on global and regional issues including peace, security, and development cooperation.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the important contributions of Canadians of Armenian descent to our national fabric, and offer our best wishes to everyone celebrating today.

Canadians are relieved that Dr. Hoodfar has been released from jail and will soon be reunited with her family, friends and colleagues.
The Government of Canada has been actively and constructively engaged at the highest levels in Dr. Hoodfar’s case – since her ordeal began – working for her release and return to Canada.
Our officials have also been providing consular assistance to her family and will continue to do so until their loved one has arrived home safely.
In the absence of diplomatic representation of its own in Iran, Canada worked closely with others who were instrumental in helping secure Dr. Hoodfar’s release – most notably Oman, Italy and Switzerland. I would like to extend our sincerest appreciation for their support.
I would also like to recognize the cooperation of those Iranian authorities who facilitated her release and repatriation. They understand that cases like these impede more productive relations.
We ask all to respect the family’s wish for privacy at this time.

It is with great sadness that I learned tonight of the death of former Israeli President and Prime Minister Shimon Peres.
Shimon Peres was, above all, a man of peace and a man dedicated to the well-being of the Jewish people.
Over the course of his long and distinguished life, Mr. Peres made enormous contributions to the founding and building of the State of Israel. He was devoted to promoting understanding between his country and its neighbours, and shared a Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to create peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Peres was an internationally-respected statesman and a great friend to Canada. He visited our country often, and helped build relations that remain strong to this day.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of Mr. Peres – and to the people of Israel. His legacy as a tireless advocate for peace will not be forgotten.

Today, we join the Hindu community in Canada – and around the world – to celebrate the beginning of Navratri.
Navratri is a celebration of the triumph of good over evil. This year, it takes place at the beginning of October, around harvest time.
To mark this occasion, families and loved ones gather over nine nights to worship, dance, and celebrate, culminating in the tenth night of festivities. This festival is celebrated by Hindus and non-Hindus alike across Canada, India, and around the world.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the important contributions of Canada’s Hindu community to our national fabric, and extend our warmest regards to everyone celebrating Navratri.

This October, I am pleased to join Canadians from coast to coast to coast to celebrate Women’s History Month.
This year’s theme – Because of Her – gives all Canadians the chance to recognize and appreciate the significant achievements and contributions women have made to our great country.
Despite historical hurdles and barriers, women have taken their place – as politicians and advocates, as entrepreneurs and leaders, as artists and academics – pushing for advances and changes that have benefited us all.
The Government of Canada has chosen to make gender equality a priority. We formed Canada’s first gender-balanced cabinet, and appointed the first woman Government House leader as well as the first ever Minister fully dedicated to gender issues. Our government has embraced the opportunity to serve on the UN Commission on the Status of Women, and we are ardent supporters of the UN Women’s HeforShe campaign. I am honoured to be the youth ambassador for HeforShe. In this role I will advocate for both gender equality and the full support and involvement of youth around the world – youth who can help us achieve gender equality faster and more effectively.
Our government will also continue to support the implementation of gender-based analysis across government departments to ensure gender implications are considered in all government policies, programs, and legislation.
While we celebrate the progress made, we remain keenly aware of the important work that still needs to be done to achieve true gender equality. By highlighting stories of how women have shaped our lives, we can inspire both current and future generations to continue to fight for a society in which all people feel empowered, and have the same opportunities to reach their full potential.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to join us in celebrating Women’s History Month. I also urge you to become part of the Government of Canada’s #BecauseofHer campaign, to share and learn more about all of the remarkable women – past and present – who have influenced us, and who have helped build a better, stronger, and much more inclusive Canada.

Today, we join Jewish communities – in Canada, in Israel, and around the world – in celebrating Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year.
Rosh Hashanah, which occurs on the first and second days of the Jewish month of Tishrei, marks the beginning of the Days of Awe. It is a time to reflect on the past year, and look forward with hope and renewed purpose to the year ahead.
To mark this occasion, families and friends gather to pray and hear the blowing of the Shofar – a ram's horn trumpet – exchange greetings, and share a special meal.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the important contributions of the Jewish community in Canada to our national fabric, and wish all those celebrating a new year filled with hope, peace, and renewal.
Shana Tova Umetukah!

World Teachers’ Day is a special day to honour the teachers who have played an essential role in our lives.
The theme of this year’s World Teachers’ Day – Valuing teachers, improving their status – is an important one. Teachers have the awesome responsibility and the humbling opportunity of building the society of tomorrow through the students they teach every day in their classrooms.
Enriching and educating the next generation of Canadians is no small task. It requires a lot of generosity, compassion, and hard work. Day in and day out, teachers seek new ways of engaging with students and explaining tough concepts, taking the time to understand students’ needs while empowering them to satisfy their own curiosity.
The Government of Canada is committed to providing teachers with the tools necessary to help students succeed. That is why we are undertaking a broad range of initiatives in this area, including: helping teachers and early childhood educators recover some out-of-pocket expenses for classroom supplies through a new school supply tax credit; investing in schools on First Nations reserves and in infrastructure projects at Canadian universities and colleges; providing learning opportunities for displaced children in the Middle East; and promoting cooperation in education with countries such as Mexico through Canada’s International Education Strategy.
I am exceptionally proud of having been a teacher. Regardless of whatever other job titles I hold over the course of my life, I will first and foremost be a teacher. That is why I was particularly delighted to present this year’s Prime Minister's Awards for Teaching Excellence and Excellence in Early Childhood Education.
In fact, today is also the beginning of the nomination period for the Prime Minister’s Awards. Between now and January 9, 2017, I encourage all Canadians to recognize our tremendous educators and their contributions to the future of Canada by nominating them for the #PMAwards.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I thank teachers in Canada and around the globe. You are inspirational leaders who change lives, and build a better world, every day.

World Mental Health Day is a time to reflect on the importance of mental health and wellness, and to foster open discussion in our families, places of work, and communities.
This year’s theme, Psychological First Aid, brings attention to the impact a helping hand can have in the life of someone experiencing a traumatic event or difficult change. Thousands of Canadians provide much needed social and psychological first aid to those who need it most: from the paramedic speaking with someone who has just witnessed a violent accident; to the immigrant services worker helping a refugee claimant integrate successfully into a new community; to a family member, friend, or colleague supporting someone close to them.
In recognition of the importance of mental health and wellness, the Government of Canada is taking action to help Canadians create resilient communities that are supportive of mental well-being. This includes working with provincial and territorial governments, Indigenous Peoples, community partners, and other stakeholders to address the stigma attached to mental health issues, and to improve access to quality mental health services.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to thank all those Canadians providing assistance and care to those facing mental health issues. I would also like to thank all those – including my mother Margaret – who have contributed to the public discussion on mental wellness through the openness and courage they have shown in sharing their personal struggles.

Today, Canadians will gather with family and loved ones to share a meal and give thanks for the countless blessings we enjoy.
Thanksgiving offers the opportunity to express gratitude for all that enriches our lives. It is also a time to reach out to those less fortunate – here in Canada and around the world – and lend a helping hand.
Over the past year, Canadians have welcomed more than 30,000 Syrian refugees who fled their homes to seek a safer and better future. As these and other newcomers celebrate their first Thanksgiving in Canada, let us never forget that helping those in need is at the heart of what makes us Canadian.
Today, we also give thanks for our men and women in uniform. For some, their service and sacrifice means spending the holiday away from home.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I wish everyone a very happy Thanksgiving filled with good food and great company.

The International Day of the Girl is an opportunity to celebrate the empowerment of girls and young women, at home and around the world, in every sphere locally and globally. It is also a day to draw attention to the unique challenges that girls still face.
While the international community has made important progress in improving the lives of girls and young women, there is still significant work to be done. Far too many girls and young women are still denied basic human rights, including education, health care and personal security. Far too many succumb to preventable diseases or are held back from pursuing their dreams.
The Government of Canada believes that every girl deserves an equal start in life, the chance to grow to her full potential, and every opportunity available to boys. I take this commitment to Canadians, to girls around the world, and to my own daughter very seriously. That is why we are investing in several programs – in Canada and beyond – that will directly benefit girls and young women, including those that promote gender equality, education and health care, and support efforts to prevent gender-based violence and stop human trafficking.
On this day, Sophie and I encourage all Canadians to join us in supporting girls and young women to realize their dreams and achieve their full potential. I also urge you to take part in the Government of Canada’s #BecauseOfHer campaign to honour the amazing girls and women who are making a difference in your community. To all Canadians, and especially to girls and young women: Happy International Day of the Girl.

At sunset today, Jewish communities – in Canada, in Israel, and around the world – will observe the beginning of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement. 
Yom Kippur is one of the holiest days in the Jewish calendar. It marks the end of the 10 Days of Awe, and is a time for repentance and renewal.
On this occasion, families and loved ones gather to fast and pray, reflect on the past year, and seek peace and reconciliation for the year to come.
Yom Kippur is an opportunity for us all to reflect on the tremendous contributions that the Jewish Canadian community has made – and continues to make – to the shaping and building of our great country. We know that Canada is a stronger and more resilient country because of its diversity.
On behalf of our entire family, Sophie and I wish an easy fast to all those observing Yom Kippur.
G’mar Chatimah Tova.

Today, over 500,000 students in more than 60 countries, including thousands across Canada, are marking the 10th annual Global Dignity Day.
The Global Dignity organization aims to inspire respect, self-esteem, and openness to diversity in young people, as well as promote the idea that every human being has the universal right to lead a dignified life.
I encourage all young Canadians to step up, show up, and speak up. Youth have the ability to think decades ahead and are not afraid to challenge the status quo today. As our government looks 40 years down the road – not just four – young Canadians will be instrumental in achieving this vision.
Today, and every day, we celebrate the fact that everyone – no matter their age – has value, worth, and the potential to help build a better world.
I am extremely proud to be one of Global Dignity’s National Role Models and encourage Canadians to promote a life of dignity for all.
Congratulations to everyone involved in marking Global Dignity Day in Canada.

On behalf of all Canadians, I am delighted to extend my congratulations to Ant?nio Guterres on his appointment by the United Nations General Assembly to be the next United Nations Secretary General, beginning in January 2017.
Canada firmly believes that the United Nations is essential to resolving many of the world’s most pressing challenges – from climate change, to refugees and migration, to securing peace.
Early next year, Mr. Guterres takes on one of the most challenging jobs in the world. Canada will be there to help him and the UN make the world a better place for its 7.5 billion inhabitants.
We have worked closely with Mr. Guterres during his time as UN High Commissioner for Refugees, and we look forward to working with him in his new capacity as Secretary General.

I was deeply saddened to learn that former Alberta Premier Jim Prentice was killed in a plane crash last night in British Columbia.
Jim Prentice brought his deep convictions to everything he turned his hand to, whether it was law, business, or politics. At each step of his career, he worked tirelessly for the people of Canada and Alberta – both as a federal minister in several different portfolios, and later, as Premier of the province.
He was broadly respected in the House of Commons – across all party lines – for his intelligence, commitment, and honest straightforward approach on tough issues. I greatly enjoyed the time I spent working closely beside Jim in the House, and know that he will be missed by his colleagues on both sides of the aisle.
Today, we mourn the passing of a great Canadian. His legacy will live on in the work he did for Albertans and for all Canadians – particularly in the important role he played in finalizing the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement – and through his daughters, who he loved dearly and was incredibly proud of.  
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to his family and friends and to the loved ones of all those who perished in this tragic accident.

Small business owners work incredibly hard to provide Canadians with quality goods and services while also creating job opportunities that strengthen communities across the country and grow the middle class.
In Canada there are over 1.16 million small and medium sized businesses. These businesses account for 99 per cent of all firms, and employ over 90 per cent of the labour force in the private sector. They are anything but ‘small’ in terms of their contribution to Canada’s economic growth, job creation, and innovation.
Small Business Week is important for many reasons. It allows Canadians to thank small business owners and entrepreneurs for their enormous contributions to our country’s prosperity. It is also a chance for current and future small business owners to participate in events across the country to learn, network, and share ideas about making their businesses as innovative, export-ready, and successful as possible.
Our government recognizes the importance of small businesses and the entrepreneurs that make them thrive. That is why we are investing in several programs that support innovation and skills training, including for women, Indigenous, and young entrepreneurs.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to celebrate our small business owners and entrepreneurs. We hope you will be able to take part in the events organized across Canada, learn, share ideas and do some networking, while recognizing the hard work, talent, ambition, and determination of small business owners and entrepreneurs.

Canada is taking a stand at the United Nations General Assembly today to protect vulnerable Syrians and help find a solution to the conflict engulfing that country.
With the support of 70 other UN countries, Canada is applying as much diplomatic pressure as possible on the UN Security Council to break their impasse on Syria.
On behalf of the government, Minister Dion called today for an immediate cessation of hostilities, the provision of unhindered humanitarian access to the victims of the conflict – including children and women – and the resumption of political talks.
I am very proud that our mission at the United Nations, spearheaded by Ambassador Marc-André Blanchard, is leading the charge to protect the many victims of this tragic conflict.
I encourage other countries to help generate forward momentum on Syria, given UN members have a collective responsibility to protect the world’s vulnerable and weak when others cannot or will not.

Two years ago, Canadians were shocked by the brutal attack that took place in and around Parliament that claimed the life of Corporal Nathan Cirillo and injured others.
This vicious attack, at the very heart of our democracy, sought to frighten and divide Canadians. Instead it had the exact opposite effect, drawing us closer together and making us stronger. In the wake of this deadly assault, parliamentarians and Canadians united in condemning terrorism and further embracing our diversity.
The whole country honoured first responders – Senate and House of Commons Protective Services, the RCMP, former House of Commons Sergeant-at-Arms Kevin Vickers, medical personnel and others – for their bravery and their willingness to put themselves in harm’s way for Canadians of all backgrounds and faiths.
It showed the world that Canada will not be intimidated by hatred and violence, but will meet these acts with strength and conviction. This also showed me yet again that our diversity and collective love of democracy are what make our country strong and our nation great.
I join all Canadians today in mourning the loss of Corporal Cirillo and Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent – who was killed two days earlier in an attack in Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, Quebec.
These two members of the Canadian Armed Forces made the ultimate sacrifice for the country they loved. The most fitting tribute that we can pay them is defending the values that they so personified.

When I addressed the United Nations (UN) General Assembly for the first time as Prime Minister this past September, I made Canada’s position clear: the world needs to focus on what brings us together and not what divides us.
Canada firmly believes that the UN is essential to addressing many of the world’s most pressing challenges – from fighting climate change, mass migration, poverty and disease, to securing peace and stability in a turbulent world.
Canada and Canadians have a storied past working with the UN, from helping draft the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to helping resolve the Suez Canal crisis, to taking leadership roles in peacekeeping, environmental protection, and fighting AIDS in Africa.
The UN and the essential work it does for humanity is once more a priority for Canada. We recently ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, and remain committed to playing a major role in peacekeeping and conflict prevention efforts.
On this day, let us pause to reflect on all that the UN has accomplished for the world, and celebrate the employees of its many affiliated programmes, funds, and specialized agencies who work tirelessly to make our global community a safer, more prosperous place. The UN is a vital organization, unparalleled in scope, that is a source of great optimism for a better tomorrow.

Today, we join Hindu, Sikh, Jain, and Buddhist communities across Canada and around the world to celebrate Diwali and Bandi Chhor Divas.
This holiday – known as the Festival of Lights – reflects the triumph of good over evil and celebrates the power of knowledge and hope over ignorance and despair. It is also a time of contemplation and an opportunity to reflect on how to help those less fortunate.
As we light diyas, share meals, and exchange gifts, we are reminded that Canada’s unique diversity is a blessing. Diwali brings some of the world’s great faiths together, and celebrates our shared values of respect, inclusion, and pluralism.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish all those celebrating a very happy Diwali and Bandi Chhor Divas!

The people of Yukon have chosen to elect a government led by the Yukon Liberal Party.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I offer my sincere congratulations to Sandy Silver and all Members of the Legislative Assembly on their electoral victory.
I look forward to working with the new government of Yukon, in a spirit of cooperation and collaboration, to build a strong middle class, and a solid foundation for a sustainable economic future in the North. By working closely together, we can help create stronger communities, improve the well-being of Indigenous peoples, and address shared challenges.
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to Darrell Pasloski for his contributions to the territory and to Canada during his time as Premier. I wish him all the best in his future endeavours.

On behalf of the Government of Canada, I would like to congratulate Donald J. Trump on his election as the next President of the United States.
Canada has no closer friend, partner, and ally than the United States. We look forward to working very closely with President-elect Trump, his administration, and with the United States Congress in the years ahead, including on issues such as trade, investment, and international peace and security.
The relationship between our two countries serves as a model for the world.  Our shared values, deep cultural ties, and strong integrated economies will continue to provide the basis for advancing our strong and prosperous partnership.

It is with deep sorrow that I learned today of the death of the legendary Leonard Cohen.
A most remarkable Montrealer, Leonard Cohen managed to reach the highest of artistic achievement, both as an acclaimed poet and a world-renowned singer-songwriter. He will be fondly remembered for his gruff vocals, his self-deprecating humour and the haunting lyrics that made his songs the perennial favourite of so many generations.
Leonard Cohen is as relevant today as he was in the 1960s. His ability to conjure the vast array of human emotion made him one of the most influential and enduring musicians ever. His style transcended the vagaries of fashion.
Leonard Cohen was made a Companion of the Order of Canada in 2003 and received many artistic honours during his lifetime, including being inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame, the Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame, and the American Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
He received a Lifetime Achievement Grammy in 2010 and was awarded the Glenn Gould Prize for lifetime achievement in the arts in 2011.  In 2013, with a career already spanning more than fifty years, he won Junos as Artist of the Year and Songwriter of the Year for his 2012 album Old Ideas. His music had withstood the test of time.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I wish to express our deepest sympathies to Leonard Cohen’s family, friends, colleagues and many, many fans.
Leonard, no other artist's poetry and music felt or sounded quite like yours. We'll miss you.

Today, we pause to remember and honour the Canadian men and women who have served our country and fought for freedom around the world.
Time may fade, but our memories cannot. We all have a duty to hold the torch high, and to keep its flame alight. Liberty’s cause beats deeply within our hearts, and every generation of Canadians has answered the call to serve.
We must remember that, during the First and Second World Wars, Canada and Newfoundland fought side by side. This year marks the 100th anniversary of the Battle of Beaumont-Hamel, when a generation of Newfoundlanders laid down their lives in defence of the freedom, democracy, and diversity that we enjoy today.
From Ypres to Vimy Ridge, Dieppe to Juno Beach – we will not forget. From Korea to the Suez, Cyprus to Kandahar – we will not forget. We remember yesterday’s youth, far from home, who fought for reason and progress. They stood up to tyranny and stood for liberty, and sacrificed their future for the future of so many.
We honour Canada’s bravest, who stand shoulder to shoulder with our allies around the world. Every day, they face down the threat of terrorism, and protect the values we cherish most.
At 11:00 am, I encourage all Canadians – no matter where you are – to observe the two minutes of silence. When we remember, we must remember war as it was and as it is. Freedom’s terrible price is known but to the few who have fought for it.
That is why today we stand sombre and silent, with poppies close to our hearts, and take the time to remember.
Lest we forget.

Canadian entrepreneurs work hard every day to transform new ideas into market-ready products and services that they export to the world, while creating job opportunities here at home that grow our middle class, strengthen our communities, and shape the course of our country’s future.
Global Entrepreneurship Week celebrates their ingenuity, hard work, and enormous contributions to our nation’s prosperity and economic security. This week is also an opportunity for aspiring entrepreneurs to connect with collaborators, mentors, and investors, and explore ways to turn their dreams into reality.
The Government of Canada is committed to helping Canadian entrepreneurs grow their businesses and thrive – here at home and abroad. We know that our entrepreneurs and small business owners are essential to creating the economy – and the well-paying jobs – of the future. That is why we are investing in programs that support innovation and skills training, including for women, Indigenous, and young entrepreneurs. That is also why we are negotiating new trade agreements with traditional and new partners around the world. The recently signed Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement will create new job opportunities and help grow our middle class and those working hard to join it.
On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to celebrate our entrepreneurs by participating in events during this important week. We thank the official host of Global Entrepreneurship Week in Canada – Futurpreneur Canada – and wish them every success with this year’s activities.

Today, Sikhs in Canada and around the world celebrate the birth of Guru Nanak Dev Ji.

To mark this happy occasion, Sikh families and loved ones celebrate and reflect on the teachings of the founder of Sikhism.

Let us be inspired by his teachings of equality, unity, selflessness, service, and social justice. In meeting with Sikhs across the country, I see these teachings upheld to this day.

On behalf of our family, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to reflect on the significant contributions of the Sikh community to our national fabric, and wish all those celebrating the birth of Guru Nanak Dev Ji a peaceful and joyous day.

Every day, I am energized by the potential of Canada’s young people. I am equally concerned by the challenges they face, and deeply aware that the decisions we make today will shape the world they will one day inherit.
That is why, on National Child Day, I encourage all Canadians to celebrate our children and youth, and to reflect on the obligation that we have to our children and grandchildren.
Each child deserves to be raised in an environment that is free of violence, discrimination, and exploitation; to grow up with proper nutrition, health care, and a good education; and to have a voice in matters that affect them, and a real, fair chance to succeed.
The Government of Canada remains committed to programs that help every child get the best possible start in life and reach their full potential. Here, at home, we are giving Canadian families more money to help with the high cost of raising their kids through the new Canada Child Benefit, which stands to lift about 300,000 children out of poverty. We are also working with our international partners to create environments where all children are treated with dignity and respect, and given all the opportunities they need to succeed.
‘While the world has made significant progress in advancing children’s rights since the introduction of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, there is still a lot of work to do. Millions of children and young people continue to be denied basic human rights – including education, primary health care, and personal security. Many more are forced into early marriages, recruited as child soldiers, or become victims of child labour.
On this day, Sophie and I invite all Canadians to join us in celebrating National Child Day by speaking to children of all ages about their rights. We also urge you to visit the National Child Day website for activities and events in your communities marking this special day.
Canada’s future is only as strong and boundless as the dreams and aspirations of our children and youth. We must support them in everything they do and want to be.

Violence against women is not a women’s issue. Men must boldly work alongside women to combat this violence – and not simply because they have wives, daughters, or sisters. Women deserve the full depth of respect, safety, and dignity, regardless of their relationships with men.
To change the prevalence of this violence, we must first challenge the attitudes and behaviours that allow this violence to exist, and that allow disrespect for and abuse of women to become commonplace. We must teach our daughters and sons the importance of gender equality and the need to treat everyone with equal respect.
That is why the Government of Canada is investing in several programs both in Canada and around the world to help promote gender equality, support efforts to prevent gender-based violence, and stop human trafficking.
Today and throughout the 16 Days of Activism Against Gender-Based Violence, I encourage all Canadians not only to think about how their actions matter, but also to stand up against gender-based violence. Get started by joining the conversation online using the hashtag #ActionsMatter. Together, we can create a world that does not tolerate violence against women.

It is with deep sorrow that I learned today of the death of Cuba’s longest serving President.
Fidel Castro was a larger than life leader who served his people for almost half a century. A legendary revolutionary and orator, Mr. Castro made significant improvements to the education and healthcare of his island nation.
While a controversial figure, both Mr. Castro’s supporters and detractors recognized his tremendous dedication and love for the Cuban people who had a deep and lasting affection for el Comandante.
I know my father was very proud to call him a friend and I had the opportunity to meet Fidel when my father passed away. It was also a real honour to meet his three sons and his brother President Raúl Castro during my recent visit to Cuba.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family, friends and many, many supporters of Mr. Castro. We join the people of Cuba today in mourning the loss of this remarkable leader.

Today, we commemorate one of the darkest chapters in human history: the forced starvation of millions of Ukrainians by the tyrannical regime of Joseph Stalin in the early 1930s. This genocidal act was designed to destroy the identity and will of the Ukrainian people. It did not achieve its aim. Despite the brutality of the Holodomor, Ukrainians endured and, after decades of Soviet control, Ukraine achieved its independence in 1991.
Canada stands firm with the Ukrainian people in condemning the atrocities of the Holodomor, and ensuring that its victims are not forgotten. We also remain committed to supporting Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity as well as the important steps taken by the Ukrainian government to bring greater security, prosperity, and economic independence to their people.
I invite all Canadians to take time today to remember those who suffered as a result of the Holodomor and to reflect on the important contributions citizens of Ukrainian descent have made all across Canada. Their resilience and determination have helped build Canada’s diverse society, which is our strength and pride.

On behalf of all Canadians, I congratulate the Ottawa Redblacks on their 2016 Grey Cup victory over the Calgary Stampeders in Toronto, Ontario. I also applaud both teams for having won their respective division championships.
The Grey Cup is one of our country’s most popular sporting events, and this year was no different with millions of Canadians tuned in to watch the game from coast to coast to coast. Even on a plane flying back from Madagascar, Africa, I was following the game as best I could, getting updates from my staff.
Finally, congratulations to both teams and the Canadian Football League for providing another great season full of memorable moments in sport, and to the organizers and hosts of this year’s successful Grey Cup championship game.

On behalf of all Canadians, I would like to congratulate Lieutenant-General Chris Whitecross on being appointed as Commandant of the NATO Defense College.
Her appointment to this prestigious position speaks volumes of her leadership, professionalism and training, and reflects very well on both the Canadian Armed Forces and our country.
Over the course of her career, Lieutenant-General Whitecross has served as a role model and a strong voice for female leadership and gender equality in the military.
I am both confident in her abilities and reassured that she will be playing a pivotal role in preparing NATO’s top officers and civilian personnel for the challenges that lie ahead for the Alliance.
Lieutenant-General Whitecross is the third Canadian to be Commandant of the College and the first female Commandant in the 65-year history of the school. Her appointment is yet another milestone in Canada’s proud history with NATO, a vital defence organization that we will continue to strongly support.
I was profoundly saddened to learn yesterday of the tragic accident that took the life of Captain Thomas McQueen of the Royal Canadian Air Force as he was training at the Cold Lake Air Weapons Range.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family, friends, and colleagues of Captain McQueen.
This accident is another painful reminder of the dangers that members of the Canadian Armed Forces face every day to ensure the safety and security of our citizens. Their courage, their bravery, and the sacrifices they make represent the very best of what it means to be Canadian. I would also like to thank all first responders for their efforts on that tragic day.
A proud member of 401 Tactical Fighter Squadron, Captain McQueen lost his life in the line of duty. His sacrifice will be honoured and remembered by all Canadians.

Let us pause on World AIDS Day to remember the many people in Canada and around the world who have been lost to HIV/AIDS, and to renew our commitment to eliminating this disease in the years to come.
Today, and every day, we extend our compassion and kindness to everyone who is affected – not only those we have lost, but also those who are still living, including families.
Tens of thousands of Canadians are living with HIV, and over 36 million people worldwide are HIV-positive. Thanks to major advances in treatment and care, people diagnosed today are able to live with hope in ways not possible in decades past. Still, much work remains to be done to promote education, prevention, treatment, care, and to find a cure.
During the Fifth Replenishment Conference of the Global Fund, which Canada hosted in Montréal earlier this year, the Government of Canada pledged $804 million to international efforts to fight AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis. At home, we are investing in the work of Canadian HIV/AIDS researchers, as well as community-based organizations to prevent new infections and ensure people living with HIV have access to treatment, care and support. We will continue to lead by example and help put an end to this serious, but preventable infection.
Finally, we all have a responsibility to do what we can to remove stigma and discrimination around HIV. All people living with HIV/AIDS, be they men, women, children, youth or trans persons deserve to be respected, and we must all challenge any negative attitudes or assumptions towards those living with this condition.
The fight against HIV/AIDS is a winnable one. I encourage all Canadians to support efforts to raise awareness about HIV/AIDS prevention through the UN-led #HIVPrevention campaign. By working together with researchers, activists, civil society, other countries, and the courageous people living with HIV/AIDS around the world, we can bring this global epidemic to an end.

•	
On the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, we celebrate the contributions made by persons with disabilities to our country, and recommit ourselves to building a Canada that is truly inclusive and equal.
Around the world, far too many persons with disabilities still face major barriers – stigma, discrimination, limited accessibility, even denial of basic human rights – to fully participate in society.
Here at home we are trying to do our part to address this challenge. Over the last several months, Minister Carla Qualtrough – Canada’s first ever federal minister of persons with disabilities – has consulted across the country on planned accessibility legislation to promote equality of opportunity and increase the inclusion and participation of Canadians who have disabilities or functional limitations. I welcome everyone to partake in these consultations, which will continue until the end of February 2017.
Today, and every day, let us take action to break down the barriers that exclude Canadians with disabilities. We cannot rest until persons with disabilities have the same opportunities as everyone else.

Twenty-seven years ago today, 14 young women were murdered at l'École Polytechnique de Montréal simply because they were women.
On this somber anniversary, let us reflect on what Canadians – women, men, and youth – can do to rid the country and the planet of the scourges of misogyny and gender-based violence.
The statistics on violence against girls and women are unacceptable. Far too many girls and women, here in Canada and around the world, suffer physical and psychological harm at the hands of others – often people they love and trust.
On this day – and every day – we recommit ourselves to finding solutions that help prevent future acts of violence. Men and boys are a vital part of the solution to change attitudes and behaviours that allow for this violence to exist. There must be zero tolerance for violence against women, and only with everyone’s support can we build a Canada that is safe for all.
That is why the Government of Canada is investing in several programs, both in Canada and around the world, to help promote gender equality by supporting education and prevention efforts, as well as helping those who have been targeted by gender-based violence. For example, we will continue to grow and maintain Canada’s network of shelters and transition houses, so no one fleeing domestic violence is left without a place to turn.
As we mourn today with the families and friends of those bright and talented young women who were victims of that senseless act of hatred, I encourage everyone to think about how their own personal actions matter. Start by joining the conversation online using the hashtag #ActionsMatter. Together we can change minds and stop gender-based violence before it starts.


Tonight, Canadians will gather on Parliament Hill for the official illumination ceremony of the Christmas Lights Across Canada program, kicking off the holiday season.
These lights illuminate our nation’s capital and provincial and territorial capitals across the country. They connect our communities and represent the values that bring us together – those of peace, unity, and confidence in the future.
This year, the Christmas Lights Across Canada tradition holds special significance as we count down towards the 150th anniversary of Confederation in 2017.
As we share the holiday season with family and friends, let us take a moment to reflect on how fortunate we are to call Canada home. Let us also remember the brave women and men of the Canadian Armed Forces, and their families, who make incredible sacrifices for our country each and every day.
Finally, I encourage all Canadians to warmly welcome those who have recently arrived in Canada as they experience the Canadian holiday season – and a Canadian winter – for the first time. We are neighbours who look out for each other, and lending a hand to those in need is at heart of the holiday season.
A humanitarian disaster is taking place before our very eyes. Some 200,000 civilians, including many children, in eastern Aleppo are cut off from food and medicine supplies. Aleppo is being subjected to daily bombings and artillery attacks by the Syrian regime, supported by Russia and Iran. Hospitals and schools have not been spared. Rather, they appear to be the targets of attack in an attempt to wear people down. The images of dying children are heart breaking. We condemn the actions of the Syrian regime and its foreign backers, especially Russia, for their obstruction of humanitarian aid, and strongly condemn the Syrian regime’s attacks that have devastated civilians and medical facilities and use of barrel bombs and chemical weapons.
The urgent need now is for an immediate ceasefire to allow the United Nations to get humanitarian assistance to people in eastern Aleppo and to provide humanitarian relief to those who have fled eastern Aleppo. The opposition have agreed the UN’s 4-point plan for Aleppo. The regime needs to agree (to) the plan too. We call on the Syrian regime to do this urgently to alleviate the dire situation in Aleppo; and call on Russia and Iran to use their influence to help make this happen.
We urge all parties in Syria to adhere to international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions. UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has spoken about war crimes being committed in Syria. There must not be impunity for those responsible. We call on the UN to investigate respective reports and gather evidence to hold the perpetrators of war crimes to account. We are ready to consider additional restrictive measures against individuals and entities that act for or on behalf of the Syrian regime.
At the same time, Russia is blocking the UN Security Council, which is therefore unable to do its work and put an end to the atrocities. The regime’s refusal to engage in a serious political process also highlights the unwillingness of both Russia and Iran to work for a political solution despite their assurances to the contrary. We support the efforts of the UN Special Envoy (Staffan) de Mistura to resume the political process through negotiations. Only a political settlement can bring peace for people in Syria.

As referenced in the Elders’ Statement delivered today by Elmer Courchene: ‘With our spiritual laws, practices, experiences and relationships with our lands and territories, First Nations have a vital role in defending and healing Mother Earth. This is our obligation.’
Canada and the Assembly of First Nations (AFN) recognize that First Nations are climate leaders. First Nations have demonstrated great resiliency. They are among the most vulnerable to a rapidly changing environment due to significant social, cultural, ecological, and economic impacts and historic failure to respect First Nations rights. Together, Canada and First Nations will collaborate on climate change action to limit its impacts, and transition to a cleaner economy that will create more opportunities for First Nations throughout the country, including in remote, coastal and northern communities. 
We agree to work together to ensure First Nations are full and effective partners in advancing clean growth and addressing climate change. This will be done through robust, ongoing and meaningful engagement based on recognition of rights, respect, cooperation and partnership, consistent with the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, including free, prior and informed consent.
The AFN, through the Advisory Committee on Climate Action and the Environment, will begin its discussions on a First Nations-led climate plan that prioritizes First Nations issues, rights and interests.
Therefore, in taking action on climate change and in moving forward on the implementation of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, a structured, collaborative approach for meaningful engagement will be pursued between the Government of Canada and First Nations. This will ensure that First Nations are full and effective partners in advancing clean growth and achieving climate change goals to mitigate and reduce emissions as a necessary precursor to the mitigation of climate impacts on First Nations. 
The Framework builds on the Paris Agreement and reinforces that the rights of First Nations need to be recognized and respected when taking action to address climate change. Our partnership and engagement reflects our joint commitment to renewing the relationship between the Government of Canada and First Nations on a nation-to-nation basis.
First Nations across the country are demonstrating climate leadership, and are active drivers of positive change towards a cleaner environment to the benefit of all Canadians. Working together on climate change and the implementation of this Framework is another step toward reconciliation between Canada and First Nations, and will help build a more sustainable, prosperous and inclusive country for all.
As referenced in the Elders’ Statement delivered today by Elmer Courchene: ‘With our spiritual laws, practices, experiences and relationships with our lands and territories, First Nations have a vital role in defending and healing Mother Earth. This is our obligation.’
Canada and the Assembly of First Nations (AFN) recognize that First Nations are climate leaders. First Nations have demonstrated great resiliency. They are among the most vulnerable to a rapidly changing environment due to significant social, cultural, ecological, and economic impacts and historic failure to respect First Nations rights. Together, Canada and First Nations will collaborate on climate change action to limit its impacts, and transition to a cleaner economy that will create more opportunities for First Nations throughout the country, including in remote, coastal and northern communities. 
We agree to work together to ensure First Nations are full and effective partners in advancing clean growth and addressing climate change. This will be done through robust, ongoing and meaningful engagement based on recognition of rights, respect, cooperation and partnership, consistent with the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, including free, prior and informed consent.
The AFN, through the Advisory Committee on Climate Action and the Environment, will begin its discussions on a First Nations-led climate plan that prioritizes First Nations issues, rights and interests.
Therefore, in taking action on climate change and in moving forward on the implementation of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, a structured, collaborative approach for meaningful engagement will be pursued between the Government of Canada and First Nations. This will ensure that First Nations are full and effective partners in advancing clean growth and achieving climate change goals to mitigate and reduce emissions as a necessary precursor to the mitigation of climate impacts on First Nations. 
The Framework builds on the Paris Agreement and reinforces that the rights of First Nations need to be recognized and respected when taking action to address climate change. Our partnership and engagement reflects our joint commitment to renewing the relationship between the Government of Canada and First Nations on a nation-to-nation basis.
First Nations across the country are demonstrating climate leadership, and are active drivers of positive change towards a cleaner environment to the benefit of all Canadians. Working together on climate change and the implementation of this Framework is another step toward reconciliation between Canada and First Nations, and will help build a more sustainable, prosperous and inclusive country for all.
Sophie and I offer our best wishes today to His Highness the Aga Khan, the spiritual leader of the Shia Imami Ismaili Muslims – a community that includes tens of thousands in Canada and millions around the world.
For more than fifty years, His Highness has worked tirelessly to reduce hunger, poverty, disease, and illiteracy in developing countries. He is a beacon of acceptance and compassion, and an inspiration to both his community and the world.
Canada has come to share a close relationship with the Aga Khan and bestowed honorary citizenship on him in 2009. I am proud to call His Highness both a mentor and friend. He has shown time and time again that no matter our faith, where we were born, what colour is our skin, or what language we speak, we are equal members of this world.
Today, we salute the tremendous efforts that the Aga Khan has undertaken over his lifetime to help those most vulnerable, and wish him health and happiness on this special day.

On behalf of all Canadians, I would like to congratulate Mr. Paolo Gentiloni on his appointment as Italy’s new Prime Minister.
Canada and Italy have rich and historical ties underpinned by close people-to-people bonds. I look forward to working with Prime Minister Gentiloni on deepening relations between our two countries.
I would also like to thank outgoing Prime Minister Renzi for being such a good friend to Canada during his time as leader, especially for his support on the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement. I wish him well in his future endeavours.
Last year, I committed to a renewed relationship with Indigenous Peoples, one based on the recognition of rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership. Today, we take further steps on the journey of reconciliation.
First, we will create permanent bilateral mechanisms with the Assembly of First Nations (AFN) and First Nations, the Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami and the four Inuit Nunangat Regions, and the Métis National Council and its governing members. In this Kelowna-like process, every year, we will meet to develop policy on shared priorities, and monitor our progress going forward. Similar meetings with key Cabinet Ministers will take place at least twice each year.
Second, we will establish an Interim Board of Directors to make recommendations on the creation of a National Council for Reconciliation. The Interim Board will begin an engagement process to develop recommendations on the scope and mandate of the National Council.
Third, we will provide $10 million to support the important work of the National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation located at the University of Manitoba, as recommended in Call to Action 78. This contribution will help to ensure that the history and legacy of Canada’s residential school system is remembered.
These announcements build on progress we have made together over the past year. Work is underway on 41 of the Calls to Action outlined in the Final Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission that fall under federal or shared purview.
While much more remains to be done, I believe that we are making real progress towards renewing our relationship with Indigenous Peoples.


I was shocked and saddened to learn of the death of a Canadian and the injury of her son in a terrorist attack that took place in Karak, Jordan, that has left several dead and many more injured.
On behalf of all Canadians, Sophie and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of all the victims of this heinous act of violence. We pray that those injured will have a complete and speedy recovery.
Our embassy personnel in Amman are providing consular assistance and are working with Jordanian officials in this tragic situation.
This is a sad reminder of the very real threat of terrorism around the globe and of the need to continue working closely with trusted allies such as Jordan to help prevent horrific attacks of this nature. The people of Canada stand in solidarity with all Jordanians during this difficult time.
The Government of Canada will not comment further at this time out of respect for the family.

Merry Christmas, Canada!
The holiday season is truly my favourite time of the year. As we come together with loved ones, let us reflect on how fortunate we are to call this beautiful country home.
Living in Canada comes with a responsibility to be there for each other – and not just during this time of year, but each and every day. After all, Canadians helping others – no matter the distance that separates them – is what this country is all about.
When tragedy struck Fort McMurray, and thousands of Canadians were forced to leave their homes, thousands more came together to make sure evacuated families had a place to stay, clothes to wear, and food to eat.
Today, as Canadians continue to welcome Syrian refugees, we open our hearts and homes to those most in need. Together, we demonstrate that better is always possible and that, in difficult times, we are at our very best.
So, during this season of hope, let us reach out to those who are hurting most. Let us give back in whatever way we can, and make sure this holiday season is a happy time for everyone. There is no holiday tradition more timeless than that.
I also ask you take a moment to remember the brave women and men of the Canadian Armed Forces – and their families – who make incredible sacrifices to protect our country.
As we look to the new year, and get ready to celebrate Canada’s 150th birthday, I know our best days are yet to come.
From Ella-Grace, Hadrien, Xavier, Sophie and me, to your family: Merry Christmas, happy holidays, and all the best in 2017. 


At sunset today, the Jewish community in Canada and around the world will welcome the beginning of Hanukkah, the 8-day Festival of Lights.
Hanukkah commemorates the struggle of the Jewish people to overcome adversity, and to find light in times of unspeakable suffering. It teaches us that peace can reign triumphant and that, by working together, we can build a brighter, better world for ourselves and our children.
To mark this occasion, family and friends will gather to pray, sing, and light the menorah. They will enjoy food and tell stories of hopefulness and optimism.
On behalf of Sophie and our three children, I invite all our country’s citizens to reflect on the immense contributions that Jewish Canadians make to our nation, and wish all those celebrating a happy and peaceful Hanukkah.
Chag Hanukkah Sameach

Before we leave 2016 behind, I want to thank you. Over the last year, we have accomplished a great deal together to strengthen the middle class and those working hard to join it.
We cut taxes on middle-class Canadians, and put more money in the pockets of nine out of ten families through a new, more generous Canada Child Benefit; we also signed one of the most progressive free trade deals in history that will benefit Canadians across the country.
As we mark Canada 150 over the next year, we will honour the generations of Canadians who have come together to create opportunities for one another. We will celebrate the courage and vision of those who came before us, and the hard work and ambition of Canadians – like you – who have made Canada the success story that it is today.
For my part as Prime Minister, I will always stand against the politics of fear and division, and focus on what brings us together – that is my New Year’s resolution to you.
In 2017, and beyond, our government will take further steps to help the middle class and those working hard to join it. And, together, I know we will continue to build the diverse and prosperous country that we are all so proud to call home.
Canada, let's make this year our year.
On behalf of our family, Sophie and I wish you a wonderful night and all the best in 2017.

